     Level II BASIC
    Reference Manual

                  First Edition — 1978

Radio Shack — A Division of Tandy Corporation
              Fort Worth, Texas 76102




    For the TRS-80 Microcomputer System




    Reformatted for modern reading — original content preserved




              Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 1
Limited Warranty

Radio Shack warrants for a period of 90 days from the date of delivery to customer that the computer
hardware described herein shall be free from defects in material and workmanship under normal use
and service. This warranty shall be void if the computer case or cabinet is opened or if the unit is
altered or modified. During tills period, if a defect should occur, the product must be returned to a
Radio Shack store or dealer for repair. Customer's sole and exclusive remedy in the event of defect is
expressly limited to the correction of the defect by adjust- ment, repair or replacement at Radio
Shack's election and sole expense, except there shall be no obligation to replace or repair items
which by their nature are expendable. No representation or other affirmation of fact, including but not
limited to statements regarding capacity, suitability for use, or performance of the equipment, shall be
or be deemed to be a warranty or representation by Radio Shack, for any purpose, nor give rise to
any liability or obligation of Radio Shack whatsoever.

EXCEPT AS SPECIFICALLY PROVIDED IN THIS AGREEMENT, THERE ARE NO OTHER
WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING. BUT NOT LIMITED TO, ANY IMPLIED
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE? AND IN
NO EVENT SHALL RADIO SHACK BE LIABLE FOR LOSS OF PROFITS OR BENEFITS, INDI-
RECT, SPECIAL, CONSEQUENTIAL OR OTHER SIMILAR DAMAGES ARIS- ING OUT OF ANY
BREACH OF THIS WARRANTY OR OTHERWISE.

LUPORTANT NOTICE

ALL RADIO SHACK COMPUTER PROGRAMS ARE DISTRIBUTED ON AN "AS IS" BASIS
WITHOUT WARRANTY

Radio Shack shall have no liability or responsibility to customer or any other person or entity with
respect to any liability, loss or damage caused or alleged to be caused directly or indirectly by
computer equipment or programs sold by Radio Shack, including but not limited to any interruption of
service, loss of business or anticipatory profits or consequential damages resulting from the use or
operation of such computer or computer programs. NOTE: Good data processing procedure dictates
that the user test the program, run and test sample sets of data, and run the system in parallel with
the system previously in use for a period of time adequate to insure that results of operation of the
computer or program are satisfactory.

mk CCopyright 1978, by Radio Shack, A Division of Tandy Corporation, Ft. Worth, Texas 76102




                                  Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 2
This Reference Manual and You

We've prepared this Reference Manual with the assumption that you — the user - already have
considerable experience with programming in BASIC. Our LEVEL I User's Manual was written for the
total beginner - and has been greeted with wide acclaim. We freely admit this Manual has not been
written from the same perspective.

But by the time you recognize a desire (or need) for a LEVEL II BASIC, we expect that you've gone
through our LEVEL I Manual and have a solid foundation in programming. If this is your first
experience with programming micro-computers, we very strongly urge you to spend time with a
LEVEL I TRS-80 first - and the Manual we prepared for it.

If you've had experience with other forms of the BASIC language (other micro-computers or time
share systems) then you should be ready for our Reference Manual for LEVEL II. LEVEL II is a far
more powerful version of BASIC than was LEVEL I. If you have been working with LEVEL I for some
time, be prepared for some pleasant surprises — and some differences that might throw you for
awhile (for example, LEVEL I programs won't run as-is on a LEVEL II machine you'll have to modify
them). This Manual is a . . .

complete reference guide — it is not intended to be a complete step-by-step training manual or an
applications book (that will come later). . If you have some suggestions . . criticisms . additions . . . . .

concerning this Manual — we'd be glad to hear from you.

FIRST EDITION - 1978

All rights reserved. Reproduction or use, without express permission, of editorial or pictorial con- tent,
in any manner, is prohibited. No patent liability is assumed with respect to the use of the information
contained herein. While every pre- caution ha* been taken in the preparation of this book, the
publisher assumes no responsibility for errors or omissions. Neither is any liability assumed for
damages resulting from the use of the information contained herein.

O Copyright I97S. Radio Shack, A Division of Tandy Corporation, Fort Worth, Ttxat 76102. U.S.A.

Printed in the United States of America




                                    Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 3
Contents

Setting Up the System
i-iii
Tips on Loading Cassette Programs iv
1/GeneraI Information 1/1-3
2/Commands 2/1-6
3/Input- Output Statements 3/1-11
4/Program Statements 4/1- 17
5/Strings 5/1-9
6/ Arrays 6/1-6
7/Arithmetic Functions 7/1-4
8/Special Features 8/1-12
9/Editing 9/1-6
10/Expansion Interface 10/1-4
11/Saving Time and Space 11/1-2
Appendices
A/LEVEL II Summary A/1-16
B/Error Codes B/l-3
C/Conrrol, ASCII and Graphics Codes C/l-2
D/LEVEL II TRS-80 Memory Map D/l-2
E/Video Display Worksheet E/l
F/Derived Functions F/l
G/Base Conversion Table G/l
H/User Programs H/l-7
Setting Up The System
Carefully unpack the system. Remove all packing material. Be sure
you locate all cables, papers, tapes, etc. Save the packing material in
case you need to transport the system.
Connecting the Video Display and Keyboard;
1. Connect the power cord from the Video Display to a source of
1 20 volts, 60 Hz AC power. Note that one prong of the AC
plug is wider than the other - the wide prong should go into the
widest slot of the AC socket.
NOTE: If you use an AC extension cord, you may not be able
to plug the Display's power cord in. Do not attempt to
force this wide prong into the extension cord; use a



                                Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 4
wall outlet if at all possible.
2. Connect the power cord of the Power Supply to a source of 1 20
volts, 60 Hz AC power.
3. Connect the gray cable from the front of the Video Monitor to
the VIDEO jack on the back of the Keyboard Assembly. Take
care to line up the pins correctly (the plug fits only one way).
NOTE: Before the next step, be sure the POWER switch on the
back of the Keyboard is off (button out).
4. Connect the gray cable from the Power Supply to the POWER
jack on the back of the Keyboard Assembly. Again, take care to
mate the connection correctly.
Connecting The Cassette Recorder:
NOTE: You do not need to connect the Cassette Recorder unless
you plan to record programs or to load taped programs into the
TRS-80.
1. Connect the CTR-41 to a source of 120 volt AC power. (Batteries
are not recommended for using Recorder with TRS-80.)
2. Connect the short cable (DIN plug on one end and 3 plugs on the
other) to the TAPE jack on the back of the Keyboard Assembly.
Be sure you get the plug to mate correctly.
3. The 3 plugs on the other end of this cable are for connecting to
the CTR-41.
A. Connect t lie black plug into the HAR jack on the <:J t of the -

CTR-U. This connection provides :he output s;gr..il :"r.;:n the CTR-if tolhe TRS-SO (for loading Tape
programlinto theTRS-SO). B. Connect the larger gray plug into the AL'X jack on the CTR-41. This
connection provides the recording signal to record programs from the TRS-SO onto the CTR-il's tape.
Also, plug the Dummy Plug (provided with the CTR41J into the MIC jack (tins disconnects the built-in
Mic so it won't pick up sounds while you Lire loading tapes). NOTE: Be sure you always use the
Dummy Plug when saving programs on tape ( Recording).

"— J Dummy Plug Connect the smaller gray plug into the REM jack on the CTR-4 1This allows the
TRS-SO to automatically control .

the CTR-41 's motor (turn tape motion on and off for recording and playing tapes).

Notes On Using The Recorder There are a number of things you should be aware of as you use the
Cassette Tape System: 1. To play a tape (load a taped program into the TRS-80), you must have the
CTR-41's Volume control set to middle to upper levels, (approximately 4 to 6). Then press the CTR-4
1's PLAY key and then type cloao on the TRS-SO and EUJ£] this command. This will start the tape
motion. An * will appear on the top line of the Monitor; a second * will blink, indicating the program is
loading. When loading is done, the TRS-SO will automatically turn the CTR-41 off and flash ready on
the screen. You are then ready to RUN the program (type in RUN and hit UJH^fl ).



                                   Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 5
2. To record a program from the TRS-30, press theCTR-4!'s RECORD and PLAY keys
simultaneously. Then t\ p e csave followed by a one-letter "file-name" in quotes and EH33 this
command. When the pros-ram has been recorded the TRS-80 will automatically turn the CTR-41 off
and display ready on the screen. Now you have your program on tape (it still is in the TRS-80 also).
Many computer users nuke a second or even a third recording of the tape, just to be sure they have a
good recording. 3. Use the CTR-41's Tape Counter to aid you in locating programs on tapes. 4. For
best results, use Radio Shack's special 10 minute per side Computer Tape Cassettes (especially
designed for recording ;cm- puter programs). If you use standard audio t..pe cassettes, he sure to use
top quality, such as Realistic 5UPERTAPF. Keep in mind that audio cassettes have lead-ins on both
ends (blue nun- magnetic mylar material) - you can not record on the leader

portion of the tape. Advance the tape past the leader before recording a program. 5. When you are
not going to use a CTR-J-1 for loading or recording programs, do not leave RECORD or PLAY keys
down {press STOP). 6. To REWIND or FAST-Forward a cassette, place Record er in REWIND or
FAST-Foruard. Hun type CLOAD and hit ES333 When tape has reached the desired position, push
the Reset button inside the Expansion Port access door (rear left of TRS-80). (Instead of using this
CLOAD/Reset sequence, you could remove Ihe REMote plug from its jack: however, repeated insert
ion./removal tends to wear out any plug and is not recommended.) 7. If you want to save a taped
program permanently, break off the erase protect tab on the cassette (see CTR-41 Manual). 8. Do not
expose recorded tapes to magnetic fields. Avoid placing" your tapes near the Power Supply. 9. To
check if a tape has a program recorded on it, you can disconnect the plug from the EAR jack (also
disconnect the REM plug so you can control the CTR-41 with the keys) and Play the tape; you'll hear
the program material from the speaker. 10. For the best results when using a Recorder with the
Computer, you should keep the Recorder's heads and tape handling mechanism very clean. A new
Recorder should be cleaned before it is used the first time, and cleaned again after every four hours*
use. In addition, the tape heads should be demagnetized periodically.

A complete line of recorder accessories (cleaning solution, cotton-                    tipped   swabs,
demagnetizer-cassettes, etc.) is available at your local Radio Shack store.


Special Note:
Before attempting to load a program from tape into the Computer, be sure the cassette is rewound to
a blank portion of the tape pre- ceding the program. If you try to start the load in the middle of a ' l
preceding program, you probably will get the Computer hung up" (in which case you'll have to press
Reset and start over).

The same rule applies when you're using the CLOAD? command to compare a taped program with
one stored in the Computer.




                                  Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 6
Tips on Loading Cassette Programs

There are many factors which will affect the performance of a cassette system. The most significant
one is volume. Too low a volume may cause some of the information to be missed. Too high a
volume may cause distortion and result in the transfer of background noise as valid information. Both
of these situations will cause errors.

The recommended volume settings* for loading from cassette tape are:

PRE-RECORDED USER GENERATED RADIO SHACK LEVEL II 4-6 5 1/2-61/2 LEVEL I 7-8 7 1/2-8
1/2

If the asterisks do not appear during a load, try lowering the volume. It is also a good idea to unplug
the EARphone (black) plug and listen for the start of the program. This will tell you exactly where the
program starts. If the asterisks appear, but one is not flashing, try increasing the volume setting. If
higher volume setting doesn't solve the problem, clean the head.

Handling Load-Errors There is a very rare case in which only a minor error may occur in loading a
program and no error message will be printed. The best way to check for this, is to List the program. If
the program looks OK, use the CLOAD? command to compare the tape version with the one you
loaded. If they are not exactly the same, a "BAD" message will be printed. Such a case normally can
be remedied with a minor adjustment in the volume setting (usually a slight increase).

•Numbers refer to markings on the Radio Shack CTR-41 Recorder, which run from to 10 (full volume).
For different models of Recorders, numbers recommended may not be appropriate. Do a little
experimenting.




                                  Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 7
1 / General Information

This chapter will provide you with an overview of LEVEL II BASIC - what some of its special features
are, how it differs from LEVEL I, and generally, what you need to get going. In addition, there's a short
glossary at the end of the chapter.

Power-Up Connect Keyboard-Computer, Video Display and Power Supply as explained in the
previous section. Plug Video Display and Power Supply into 20- volt AC outlets. Press POWER
buttons on Video 1

Display and at the back of the Keyboard. Give the video tube a few seconds to warm up.

memory size? - will appear on the screen. This it your chance to protect a segment of memory so that
machine-language programs may be loaded, using a special command, SYSTEM. For normal appl
ications, you won't want to protect any memory, so just press the U;H4;I key without typing in any
numbers. This will allow you to write BASIC programs using the full memory capacity of your
Computer (for 4K LEVEL II machines, that's 3284 bytes; for 16K LEVEL II machines, it's 15,572
bytes).
     NOTE: In general, whenever you have typed something in via the keyboard and you want th e Computer
     to "act" on your input, you must first hit the M.'M3:j key just as you did with the Level I TRS-80. There are
     way s to hav e the Computer respond as soon is you hit a key (without HfHU ), but these will be covered
     later.

RADIO SHACK LEVEL II BASIC READY

will appear on the screen. You arc now ready to use LEVEL II BASIC.

Operating Modes There are four operating modes: Command, Execute, Edit and Monitor. Command
and Execute Modes are just like LEVEL I BASIC. In the Command Mode, the Computer responds to
Lomiiund* ji mj.hi ji iluy jrc i-nli-rcd. This i% ihc k-vcl you use to write programs and perform
computations directly ("calculator mode" of LEVEL I). Whenever the >_ appears on the Display,
you're in the Command Mode.

The Execute_Mode is usually entered by typing_RUN; this causes BASIC programs to be executed.
Unlike LEVEL [, LEVEL II initializes all numeric variables to zero and set? all strings to null when you
enter the command run.

The Edit Mode is a real time-saving feature of LEVEL II. It allows you to edit (alter, add to or delete)
the contents of program lines. Instead of retyping an entire program line, you change just the part that
needs changing.
     NOTE: Whenever Computer encounters a Syntax error during execution, it will go into Edit Mode for that
     line. To get out of Edit Mode, type "Q" (without quotes).

The Monitor Mode lets you load machine language "object files" into memory. These routines or data
can then be accessed by your BASIC programs, or they may be completely independent programs.


Special Function Keys


                                     Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 8
LEVEL II BASIC offers the same special function keys as LEVEL I - plus a few extras. The function of
the key depends on what mode the Computer is in.

Command Mode: rjm33 Effects a carriage return; Computer "looks at" line just typed in and acts
accordingly. If line just typed in has no line number. Computer will interpret and execute the
statements contained in the line. If Line has a line number, Computer stores the line in program
memory. Backspaces the cursor and deletes last character typed -* in.

SHIFT -* Deletes the line you are typing in, and returns cursor to beginning of logical line. t Linefeed;
moves cursor down to next physical line on the Display. • Separates BASIC statements contained on
the same logical line, to allow multi-statement lines. E.g., PRINT "FIRST STATEMENT":PRtNT
"SECOND STATEMENT" *- Moves cursor over to the next tab stop. Tab stops are at positions 0,8,
16, 24, 32, 40, 48 and 56.

shift * Converts display to 32 character-per-line format. clear Clears the Display and returns it to 64
character-per- line format.

Execute Mode: shift ® Iause; stops program execution. Hitting any key causes execution to be
resumed. Hitting shift » also freezes the Display duruiga LIST so vou can examine program lines.
BREAK Stops execution. Resume execution by typing CONT.

HSB3 y<k'.'r, Co mputer is awaiting input from the keyboard, l 3 ,)'i i^;J causes Computer to "look at"
what you've

For Edit Mode special function keys, see Chapter 9.


Variable Names
Variable names must begin with a letter ( A-Z) and may be followed by another letter or digit (0-9). So
the following arc all valid and distinct variable names: a a: AA AZ G9 GP M ML' ZZ Zl Variable name;
may be longer than two characters, but only the first two characters will be used by the computer to
distinguish between variables. For example "SUM". "SUB" and "SU" will be treated as one and the
same variable by LEVEL II BASIC.

As you can imagine, this gives you plenty of variable names to use in LEVEL II lin the neighborhood
of ''00). However, you cannot use variable names which contain words with special meaning in the
BASIC language. For example. "NOV ear-not be used as a variable name, since it contains the
BASIC keyword "ON". The complete list of "reserved wards'" which cannot be used in variable names

appears in Appendix A of this Manual.

Variable Types There are four type; of vjriables in LEVEL II: integer, single pre- cision, double
precision, and strip-: variables. The firs' three types are used to store numerical values with various
degrees of precision; the last type stores strings (sequence;) of characters - letters, blanks, numbers
and special symbols - up to 155 characters lone. LEVEL I

only allowed two string .iriables. AS and BS - hut LEVEL 11 allows you to use any vj.-ia'-Ie name tor
strings, simply by adding the string declaration character, S, to the variable name. There are
declaration characters for the other variable types, too: Here's a complete listing:

numbers %:e jier than -32769 and lew than +32768


                                  Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 9
double precision # A».ZZ*,C# 300.1 2'4SS?3. (16 lijniikani 1.141 JJ:S53ii9 fipites)
I-uOOOjOOOjOGOXH 11 double precision D "A *=1.2345673901[>+1 2" 1.2WJ67S901 x 10 with
scientific no- tation (for enieruii Doananu or during output of Large or small numbers)

string (up to I AII.GTI.HIJ "JOHN CJ. DOK",

The same variable name may be used for different variable types, and the Computer will still keep
them distinct, because of the type declaration character: For example, AS, A'l, A!, A« are distinct
variable names.

Variables without declaration characters are assumed to be single- precision; this assumption can be
changed with DEFine statements (Chapter 4).

Arrays Any valid variable name can be used to name an array in LF.VF.L 11 BASIC; and arrays are
not limited to one dimension- The DIMension statement is used to define arrays at the beginning of a
program. Depending on the variable type used, an array may contain strings, integers, double
precision values, etc. A whole chapter of this Manual isdevoted to arrays: Examples: AS (X.Y.Z)
would be a three-dimensional array containing string values Ci i.J) would be a two-dimensional array
containing I

numerical sinyls-precision values G»(I) would be a one dimensional array of double precision values.

Arithmetic Operators LEVEL II uses the same arithmetic operators ;is LEVEL 1:

+ (addition), - (subtraction), * (multiplication) and / (division). And there's a new, very handy operator:
* (exponentiation: 2*3=8). For example, to compute 6*2' ,J . print 6-2 (i/a| NOTE: Some TRS-HO's
generate a

ma i arrow. — > ..

; [ character instead of the

__ - -

S2S22 qsazzs


Relational Operators
These are the same as LEVEL L < (leu than) > (greater than) c (equal to) <>(not equal to) <»(tei than
or equal to) >»(greiter than or equal to) These operators are useful both for IF . . . THEN statements
and for logical arithmetic. Example: too if coo then c-jz7 Logical Operators In LEVEL I BASIC, * and +
were used to represent the logical operators AND and OR. In LEVEL II, we don't use symbols, we use
AND and OR directly. We also have another operator, NOT. Examples: SO IF Q - 13 AND R2 - O
THKN PRINT "READY"

100 Q " (GKO) AND (G2<L) Q — 1 if both expressions are True; otherwise Q*»0

ZOO Q (GKO) OR (G2<1_) Q — 1 if either expression is True; otherwise Q =

300 Q - NOT(C>3) Q — I if the expression is False;

Q if it is True
     400 IF NOT |P AND Q) THEN PRINT "P AND O ARE NOT BOTH EQUAL TO— 1"



                                   Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 10
      500 IF NOT [POR Q) THEN PRINT "NEITHER P NOR Q EQUALS— I"
String Operators

Strings may be compared and concatenated ("strung together**) in LEVEL II. A whole chapter of this
Manual is devoted to string manipulations.

Symbol Meaning Example < precedes alphabetically "A" < "B" > follows alphabetically "JOE" > "JIM"
= equals 85 = "WIN" <> does not equal IF ASOBSTHEN PRINT AS <* precedes or equals IF
AS<=AZ$ PRINT "DONE" >= follows or equals IF L1S>="SMITH" PRINT LIS + concatenate the two
AS = CS+C1S strings AS ="TRS-" + "80"

Order of Operations Operation* i:i :;-._ ::;:..-: mo-,: ie'.el of p irer.theies .ire pe::V ;:•-•.;,! :.:!. then
evaluation prc.fjJs to the -ex*, ie-.e! out, etc. Op.-rat.on-. o.i the same nesting level are performed
according to the following hierarchy:

Exponentiation: A * B

Negation: -X \/ (left to right)

+, - (left to right)

«,>,".<•.» , <> (left to right] . NOT AND OR

Intrinsic Functions Most of the subroutines in the LEVEL I manual are built-in to LEVEL II. They are
faster, more accurate, and much easier to v^e.

Graphics Level El has the ,ame SET. RESET and POINT f.mct:ons js LEVEL I for turning graphics
blocks on and off and determining whether an individual block is on or off. (There are a few
differences - see Chapter S.)

A big feature of LEVEL 11 is the .electable display - either 64 characters per line or 3 2 characters per
line '.;'!). When the machine is mode; hit SUIT .md •- .irnml.meo..-!;.' turned on it is in the iA c 1 I"

to change to 32 cI. Pi>pl. y v.iil return to t-,4 ci whenever a CLS or :

NEW executed or CLEAR key is bit. You can aho shift to 32 c'l is

by executing a print CHR5 (23). More on '.hi., in Chapter 5.

Error Messages LEVEL point:.} out errors by p. 1 ir. ':".'; HO'.v. what? or SOPR Y aloni; will! the
oi:emlmi> -ro-iram !mc with auuc .tion mark in cried at thepoint .:!" error. V|-[ [I :,: ;,;.-. m ..'.; I . re .;-.:;.
:

information .:-o .; 'Ah.it :> p.- .,;.:, : :,..;.-:.:. .;$% 2 set of Error .

Codes (see Appendix), ."he wi;cmh:u pr-.gr.rn; !mc ;>a!sO pointed out, but it's up to you to loc.it ice
error m the h:.e. „'

i.h

re vi ssz z: z=zs z : : .= s " " i z : -'- zsczs jgaasng^gaa Abbreviations Very few abbreviations are
allowed in LEVEL II. Ex-LEVEL I users will have to forget about H., L-, P., etc. Although LEVEL II
doesn't allow these short-forms, it stores the programs more efficiently than LEVEL I did, so you can
still pack a lot of program into a small amount of memory space.




                                        Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 11
The abbreviations are: ? for PRINT, and for :REM

for last line entered, listed, edited, or in which an error occurred.

Keyboard Rollover With the LEVEL I TRS-80 (and many other computers) you have to release one
key before the Computer will allow entry of another key. LEVEL II lets you hit the second key before
you have released the first key. This is great for you touch typists.

BHLBL-JJ.J Ji:j;m-MW«WI««

"- - "'" — "' . '

'!'

V.T H';M».: . ..^M '

Glossary for LEVEL II BASIC address a value specifying the location of a byte in memory; decimal
values are used in LEVEL II alphanumeric! the set of letters A-Z, the numerals 0-9, and various
punctuation marks and special characters argument the value which is supplied to a function and
then operated on to derive a result array an arrangement of elements in one or more dimensions
ASCII American Standard Code for Information Interchange; in LEVEL II BASIC, decimal values are
used to specify ASCII codes assembler a program that converts a symbolic-language program into a
machine-language program BASIC Beginners All-purpose Symbolic Instruction Code baud signaling
speed in bits per second; LEVEL H's cassette interface operates at 500 baud (500 bits per second)
binary number a number represented in the base-two number system using only binary digits "0"
and'M" bit binary-digit, the smallest memory cell in a computer byte the smallest memory unit that can
be addressed in BASIC, consisting of 8 consecutive bits decimal number a number represented in the
base-ten number system using the digits 0-9 expression a combination of one or more operations,
constants and variables file an organized collection of related data hexadecimal number a number
represented in the base-16 number system using the digits 0-9 plus A, B, C, D, E, F intrinsic function
a function (usually a complicated function) that may be "built-in" to the Computer's ROM and may be
used directly in a BASIC statement logical expression an expression which is either True or False: if
True, — 1 is returned if False, ; is returned machine language the language used directly by the
Computer, written as binary-coded instructions port one of 256 channels through which data can be
input to or output from the Computer RAM Random Access Memory; memory available to the user for
writing programs and storing data ROM Read Only Memory; memory which is permanently pro-
grammed and may be read but not written into; LEVEL II BASIC is stored inROM routine a sequence
of instructions to carry out a certain function statement a complete instruction in BASIC string a
sequence of alphanumeric characters ranging in length from zero (the "null" string) to 255 subroutine
a sequence of instructions for performing a desired function; may be accessed many times from
various points in a program variable a quantity that can take on any of a given set of values variable
name the label by which a given variable is addressed




                                   Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 12
2 / Commands

Whenever a prompt > is displayed, your Computer is in the Command Mode. You can type in a
command,

M 1 A i -i ; it. jnd the Computer will respond immediately.

This chapter describes the commands you'll u->e to control tl-.-- Computer - to change modes, begin
input and output procedures, alter program memory, etc. All of these commands — except CONT —
may also be used inside your program as statements. In some cases this is useful: other times it is
just for very specialized applications.

The comman ds described in this chapter are:

ALTO CONT EDIT SYSTEM CLEAR CS-WE LIST TROPF CLOAD DELETE NEW TRON CLOAD?
RUN

AUTO line number, increment Turns on an automatic line numbering function for convenient entry of
programs - all ycu have to do is enter the actual proaram statements. You can specify a beginning
line number and an increment to be used between line numbers. Or you can simply type AUTO and
hit 1 1 i i A \ in which case line numbering will begin at 10 jnd use ,

increments of 10. Each time you hit HSHJ] [ ^ e Computer will '

advance to the next line number.

Examples: to use line numbers

AUTO 10, 20, JO, . . .

AUTO 5.5 5, 10, 15 AUTO 100 100, 110, 120 AUTO 100.25 100. 125, 150. . ..

To turn off the ALTO function, hit the BREAK key. (Note: When ALTO brings up a line number which
is already being used, an asterisk will appear b,'<ide the line number. If you do not wish to re-program
the line, hit the BRiiAK key to turn off ALTO function.)

CLEAR n When used without an argument (e.g., type CLEAR and hit SZHU ). this command resets
all numeric variables to zero, and all siring variables to null. When used with an argument (e.g..
CLEAR 100), this command performs a second function in addition to the one just described: it makes
the specified number of bytes available for string storage. Exampler CLEAR 100 makes 100 bytes
available for strings. When you turn on the Computer a CLEAR 50 is executed automatically.

CLOAD "file name" Lets you load a BASIC program stored on cassette. Place recorder/player in Play
mode (be sure the proper connections are made and cassette tape has been re-wound to proper
position). NOTE: In LEVEL II. CLOAD and CSA VE operate at a transfer rate of 500 baud. This is
twice as fast as LEVEL I's cassette transfer rate. Therefore the Volume setting used during CLOAD
should be correspondingly lower. For example, if you're using Radio Shack's CTR-41 Cassette
Recorder, try a setting of between 4 and 6 on the Volume control when loading programs or data you
placed on the tape. For loading pre-recorded programs, a higher Volume level may be required. Do a
little experimenting.


                                   Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 13
Entering CLOAD will turn on the cassette machine and load the first program encountered. LEVEL II
also lets you specify a desired

"file" in your CLOAD command. For example, CLOAD '"A" will cause the Computer to ignore
programs on the cassette until itcomes to one labeled "A". So no matter where file "A" is located on
the tape, you can start at the beginning of the tape: file "A" will be picked out of all the files on the tape
and loaded.

As the Computer is searching for Tile "A", the names of the files encountered will appear in the upper
right corner of the Display, along with a blinking *'•". Only the first character of t!ie file name is used by
the Computer for CLOAD, CLOAD?, and CSAVE operations. Loading a program from tape
automatically clears out the previously stored program. See also CSAVE.

CLOAD? "file name" Lets you compare a program stored on cassette with one presently in the
Computer. This is useful when you have dumped a program onto tape (using CSAVE) and you wish
to check that the transfer was successful. If you labeled the file when you CSAVEd it, you may specify
CLOAD? "file-name". Otherwise, if you don't specify a file-name, the first program encountered will be
tested. During CLOAD?, the program on tape and the program in memory are

compared byte for byte. If there are any discrepancies (indicating a bad dump), the message "BAD"
will be displayed. In this case, you should CSAVE the program again. (CLOAD?, unlike CLOAD, does
not erase the program memory.)

CONT When program execution has been stopped (by the BREAK key or by a STOP statement in
the program), type CONT and B3S 3 to continue execution at the point where the stop or break
occurred. During such a break or stop in execution, you may examine variable values (u sing PRINT)
or change these values. Then type CONT and B3B3 an d execution will continue with the current
variable values. CONT, when used with STOP and the BREAK key, is primarily a debugging tool.
     NOTE: You cannot use CONT after EDITing your program lines or otherwise changing your program.
     CONT is also invalid after execution has ended normally. See also STOP.

CSAVE "file name" Stores the resident program on cassette tape. (Cassette recorder must be
properly connected, cassette loaded, and in the Record mode, before you enter the CSAVE
command.) You must specify a file-name with this command. This fiie-name may be any alpha-
numeric character other than double-quotes ("). The program stored on tape will then bear the
specified file-name, so that it can be located by a CLOAD command which asks for that particular
file-name. You should always write the appropriate tile-names on the cassette case for later
reference.

Examples: CSAVE "1" dumps resident program and attaches label "1" CSAVE "A" dumps resident
program and attaches label "A" See also CLOAD.

DELETE line number-line number Erases program lines from memory. You may specify an individual
line or a sequence of lines, as follows:

DELETE line number erases one line as specified DELETE line number-line number erases all
program lines starting with first line number specified and ending with last number specified
DELETE-Zi'ne number erases all program lines up to and including the specified number The upper
line number to be deleted must be a currently used number.



                                    Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 14
BE Examples: DELETE 5 erases line 5 from memory (error it line 5 not used) DELETE 11-18 erases
lines 1 1, 18 and every line in between

If you have just entered or edited a line, you may delete that line simply by entering DELETE, (use a
period instead of the line number).

EDIT line number Puts the Computer in the Edit Mode so you can modify your resident program. The
longer and more complex your programs are, the more important EDIT will be. The Edit Mode has its
own selection of subcommands, and we have devoted Chapter 9 to the subject.

LIST line number-line number Instructs the Computer to display all program lines presently stored in
memory. If you enter LIST without an argument, the entire program will scroll continuously up the
screen. To stop the auto- matic scrolling, press SHIFT and @ simultaneously. This will freeze the
display. Press any key to release the "pause" and continue the automatic scrolling. To examine one
line at a time, specify the desired line number as an argument in the LIST command. To examine a
certain sequence of program lines, specify the first and last lines you wish to examine.

Examples: LIST 50 displays line 50 LIST 50-150 displays line 50, 150 and everything in between LIST
50- displays line 50 and all higher-numbered lines list. displays current line (line just entered or
edited) LIST -50 displays all lines up to and including line 50

NEW Erases all program lines, sets numeric variables to zero and string variables to null. It does not
change the string space allocated by a previous CLEAR number statement.

RUN line number Causes Computer to execute the program stored in memory. If no line number is
specified, execution begins with lowest numbered program line. If a line number is specified,
execution begins with the line number. (Error occurs if you specify an unused line number.)
Whenever RUN is executed. Computer also executes a CLEAR.

MlMgiifV'^-:.""..^." . ..

Qga '*»,' m „„ a - .' . ' -l ..i l a -' i sen iangi a nam— Examples: RUN execution begins at
lowest-numbered line run 100 execution begins at line 100 RUN may be used inside a program as a
statement; it is a convenient way of starting over with a clean slate for continuous-loop programs such
as games.

SYSTEM Puts the Computer in the Monitor Mode, which allows you to load object files
(machine-language routines or data). Radio Shack offers several machine-language software
packages, such as-the IN-MEMORY INFORMATION SYSTEM. You can also create your own object
files using the TRS-80 EDITOR/ ASSEMBLER, which is itself an object file.

To load an object file: Type system and H3H3 *? will be displayed. Now enter the file-name (no
quotes are necessary) and the tape will begin loading. When loading is com- plete, another

*? will be displayed. Type in a slash-symbol / followed by the address (in decimal form) at which you
wi sh execu tion to begin. Or you may simply hit the slash-symbol and without any ESH33 address. In
this case execution will begin at the address specified by the object file.

TROFF Turns off the Trace function. See TRON.

TOON Turns on a Trace function that lets you follow program-flow for debugging and execution
analysis. Each time the program advances to a new program line, that line number will be displayed


                                 Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 15
inside a pair of brackets.

For example, enter the following program: 10 PRINT "START" 20 PRINT "GOING" 30 GOTO 20 40
PRINT "GONE..

Now type in TRON, Hgjjg , and RUN, H.'HJil <10> START <20> GOING <30> <20> GOING <30>
<20> GOING etc.

(Press SHIFT and @ simultaneously to pause execution and freeze display. Press any keyjto
continue with execution.) As you can see from the display, the program ii in an infinite loop.

The numbers show you exactly what is going on. (To stop execution, hit BREAK key.) To turn off the
Trace function, enter TROFF. TRON and TROFF may be used inside programs to help you tell when
a given line is executed.

For example 50 TRON *0 X»X*3.14159 70 TROFF might be helpful in pointing out every time line 60
is executed (assuming execution doesn't jump directly to 60 and bypass 50). Each time these three
lines are executed, <60> <70> will be displayed. Without TRON, you wouldn't know whether the
program was actually executing line 60. After a program is debugged, TRON and TROFF lines can be
removed.

Baagagggg; zs=ssxz^xsssa^aamamtasaaaam~




                                Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 16
3 / Input-Output Statements

3/Input-Output The statements described in this chapter let you send data from Keyboard to
Computer, Computer to Display, and back and forth between Computer and the Cassette interface.
These wii! primarily be used inside programs to input data and output results and messages.

Statements covered in this chapter:

PRINT INPUT @ (PRINT modifier) DATA TAB (PRINT modifier) READ USING (PRINT formatter)
RESTORE PRINT # (Output to Cassette) INPUT # (Input to Cassette)

PRINT item list Prints an item or a list of items on the Display. The items may be either string
constants (messages enclosed in quotes), string variables, numeric constants (numbers), variables,
or expressions involving all of the preceding items. The items to be PRINTed may be separated by
commas or semi-colons. If commas are used, the cursor automatically advances to the next print
zone before printing the next item. If semi-colons are used, no space is inserted between the items
printed on the Display.

Examples: 30 x-s 100 PRINT 23; "IS EQUAL TO"; X i 2 RUN 25 IS EQUAL. TO 23

10 AS*"STRING" 20 PRINT AS;A$,A»:" ";A% RUN STRINGSTRING STRING STRING Positive
numbers are printed with a leading blank (instead of a plus sign); all numbers are printed with a
trailing blank; and no blanks are inserted before or after strings (you can insert them with quotes as in
line 20.

E2E
      10 PRINT "ZONE r\"ZON£ Z","ZONE 3"."ZONE 4'\"ZONE 1 ETC"
      RUN
      ZONE 1 ZONE 2 ZONE 3 ZONE*
      ZONE I ETC
There are four 16-character print zones per line.
      10 PRINT "ZONE 1"„"ZONC 3"
      RUN
      ZONE 1 ZONE 3
      The cursor moves to the next print zone each time a comma is
      encountered.
      10 PRINT "PRINT STATEMENT #10 ":
      20 PRINT "PRINT STATEMENT #20"
      RUN
      PRINT STATEMENT #10 PRINT STATEMENT #20
      A trailing semi-colon over-rides the cursor-return so that the next
      PRINT begins where the last one left off (see line 10).
If no trailing punctuation is used with PRINT, the cursor drops down to the beginning of the next line.


                                  Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 17
PRINT @ position, item list Specifies exactly where printing is to begin. (AT was used in LEVEL I
BASIC.) The @ modifier must follow PRINT immediately, and the location specified must be a
number from to 1023. Refer to the Video Display worksheet, Appendix E, for the exact position of
each location 0-1023:
     100 PRINT • 550. "LOCATION 550"
     RUN this to find out where location 550 is.
Whenever you PRINT @ on the bottom line of the Display, there is an automatic line-feed, causing
everything displayed to move up one line. To suppress this, use a trailing semi-colon at the end of the
statement.

Example: 100 PRINT • 1000, 1000;

PRINT TAB (expression) Moves the cursor to the specified position on the current line (or on
succeeding lines if you specify TAB positions greater than 63). TAB may be used several times in a
PRINT list. The value at expression must be between and 255 inclusive.

' "W.TJ. tff g '

lS^Uf B BJ^ fJg B BWIBgW ft

Example: 10 PRINT TAB[3) "TABBED 5";TAB{25) "TABBED 23"

No punctuation is required after a TAB modifier.

5 X-3 10 PRINT TAB(X) X: TAB(X I 2) X *2;TAB(Xi 3) X * 3

Numerical expressions may be used to specify a TAB position. This makes TAB very useful for
graphs of mathematical functions, tables, etc. TAB cannot be used to move the cursor to the left. If
cursor is beyond the specified position, the TAB is ignored.

PRINT USING string; item list PRINT USING - This statement allows you to specify a format for
printing string and numeric values. It can be used in many applica- tions such as printing report
headings, accounting reports, checks ... or wherever a specific print format is required.

The PRINT USING statement uses the following format: PRINT USING string ; value

String and value may be expressed as variables or constants. This statement will print the expression
contained in the string, inserting the numeric value shown to the right of the semicolon as specified by
the field specifiers.

The following field specifiers may be used in the string;

# This sign specifies the position of each digit located in the numeric value. The number of # signs
you use establishes the numeric field. If the numeric field is greater than the number of digits in the
numeric value, then the unused field positions to the left of the number will be displayed as spaces
and those to the right of the decimal point will be displayed as zeros.

The decimal point can be placed anywhere in the numeric field established by the # sign.
Rounding-off will take place when digits to the right of the decimal point are suppressed.

The comma — when placed in any position between the first digit and the decimal point - will display
a comma to the left of every third digit as required. The comma establishes an additional position in



                                  Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 18
the field.

** Two asterisks placed at the beginning of the field will cause all unused positions to the left of the
decimal to be filled with asterisks. The two asterisks will establish two more positions in the field.

SS Two dollar signs placed a! the i-c^i-nir.,; of the field wiil act as a Moating dollar sign. That is, it will
occupy the first position preceding the number.

**S If these three signs are i^ed at the he^nnir.g ot" the field, then the vacant positions to the left 01'
the number will be filled by the * sign and the S sign will :igain position itself in the first position
preceding the number.

+ When a + si-gn is placed at the beginning or end of the field, it will be printed as specified as a + for
positive numbers or as a - for negative numbers.

— When a - sign is placed at the end oi the field, it will cause a negative >ign to appear alter all
negative numbers and will appear as a space for positive numbers.

%spaces% To specify a string field of more than one character, nsp.ms is used. The length of the
string field will be 2 '"':

plus the number of spaces between the percent signs.

! Causes the Computer to use the first string character of the current value.

The following program will help demonstrate these format specifiers:
     10 INPUT A$. A
     20 PRINT USING AS;
     30 GOTO 10
RUN this program and try various specifiers and strings for AS and various values for A.

For Example: RUN T ##.#». 12. 12 12.12 7 i«*.»j, 12.12 12.12 T »*.»», 121.21 % 121.21 The % sign
is automatically printed ih.- field ;s not I.iree it"

enough to contain the number of Jiiits Jund in the m;;:.eric I

value. The entire number to the left of the decimal will be displayed preceded by this >ign.

T *».»», 12.127 12.13 Note that the number was rounded to two decimal places.

KTIV-. ' ,•:.•• " -1Z—Z1

7 +*#.w»,!2.|Z + 12.12 T + ##.##. -12.12 -12.12 7 #»,*#+, 12. 12 12.12+ 7 *#.##+, -12.12 1 2. 1 2- ?
#s*.#s»-, 12.12 12.12 T *#.##-, -12.12 1 2. 1 2- 7 **#*. 12.12 "12 7 **##.##, 1212.12 1212.12 ?
SS**.»*. 12.12 SI2.12 7 '• ##,**##", 12121.2 12.121.2 7 *###,#, 12121.2 12,121 7 ###. 1212 % 1212
Another way of using the PRINT USING statement is with the string field specifiers "!" and ?ospaces
%.

Examples: PRINT USING "i": string PRINT USING "% %"; String **!" sign will allow The only the first
letter of the string to be printed. The "% spaces %" allows spaces +2 characters to be printed. Again,
the string and specifier can be expressed as string variables. The following program will demonstrate
this feature: 10 INPUT AS. BS 20 PRINT USING AS; BS 30 GOTO 10




                                    Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 19
and RUN it:

7 I, ABCDE A 7 %%, ABCDE AS ? % V ABCO Multiple strings or string variables can be joined
together (concatenated) by these specifiers. The **!" sign will allow only the first letter of each string
to be printed. For example:
     10 INPUT AS. BS. CS
     20 PRINT USING "l"; AS; BS: CS
E - - -- >;.,.,.-.. :-rr.

And RUN it . .

7 ABC.DEF.GHI -ADS By using more than one '*!" sign, the first letter of each string will be printed
with spaces inserted corresponding to the spaces inserted between the "!" signs. To illustrate this
feature, make the following change to the last little program:
     20 PRINT USING "] I I"; AS, B$. CS
And RUN it . .

T ABC.DEF.GHI A D G

Spaces now appear between letters A, D and G to correspond with those placed between the three
"!" signs.

Try changing"! ! !" to "%%" in line 20 and run the program. The following program demonstrates one
possible use for the PRINT USING statement.
     10 CLS
     20 AS *'•**«##.######.## DOLLARS"
     30 INPUT "WHAT IS YOUR FIRST NAME"; FS
     40 INPUT "WHAT IS YOUR MIDDLE NAME": MS
     90 INPUT "WHAT IS YOUR LAST NAME"; LS
     60 INPUT -ENTER THE AMOUNT PAYABLE"; P
     70 CLS: PRINT "PAY TO THE ORDER OF ";
     80 PRINT USING "11 II "; FS; ".": M$; ".":
     90 PRINT LS
     100 PRINT: PRINT USING AS; P
     110 GOTO 1 10
RUN the program. Remember, to save programming time, use Che "?" sign for PRINT. Your display
should look something like this:

WHAT IS YOUR FIRST NAME? JOHN WHAT IS YOUR MIDDLE NAME? PAUL WHAT IS YOUR
LAST NAME? JONES ENTER AMOUNT PAYABLE7 12343.8 PAY TO THE ORDER OF J. P.
JONES *****••$! 2.343.80 DOLLARS

If you want to use an amount greater than 999,999 without rounding off or going into scientific
notation, then simply add the double precision sign (#) after the variable P in Lines 60 and 100. You
will then be able to use amounts up to 16 decimal places* long.




                                  Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 20
INPUT item list Causes Computer to stop execution until you enter the specified number of values via
th; keyboard. The INPUT statement may- specify a list of str>g or numeric variables to be input. The
items in the list musl be separated by commas.
    100 INPUT XS, XI, ZS, Z1
This statement calls for you to input a string-literal, a number, another string literal, and another
number, in that order. When the statement is encountered, the Computer will display a

You may then enter the values all at once or one at a time. To enter values all at on--:i, separate them
by commas. (If your string literal includes leading blanks, colons, or commas, you must enclose the
string in quotes.)

For example, when line 00 (above) is RUN and the Computer is 1

waiting for your input, you could type

JIM. 50. JACK, 40 t LiLliiiJ '

The Comcuter will assign values as follows:

If you ES3J tntf values one at a time, the Computer will display a

. . . indicating that more data is expect:d. Continue entering data until all the variables have been set,
at which time the Computer will advance to the next statement in your program.

Be sure to enter The correct type 0\ v ilue according to what is ca'!e> for by the INPUT statement. For
example, you can't inriat a string-value into a numerical variable. 1!" you try so. the Computer will
display a

and give you another chance to enter the correct type of data value, starting with the first value called
for by the INPUT list.
     NOTE: You cannot input an expression into a numerical value - you must input a simple numerical
     constant. (LEVEL allowed I

you to input an expression or even a variable into a numerical variable.)

Example: too INPUT XI, YIS 200 PRINT XI, YIS RUN ?_ [you type:] 7*3 1 02523 T REDO t_ [you
type:] 10 (02233) r»_ [you type:] "this is a comma: 10 THIS IS A COMMA:,

It was necessary to put quotes around "THIS IS A COMMA:," because the string contained a comma.

If you HZH33 more data elements than the INPUT statement specifies, the Computer will display the
message

7EXTRA IGNORED and continue with normal execution of your program.

You can also include a "prompting message" in your INPUT statement. This will make it easier to
input the data correctly. The prompting message must immediately follow "INPUT*, must be enclosed
in quotes, and must be followed by a semi-colon.

Example: 100 INPUT "ENTER YOUR NAME AND AGE (N AME,AGE)".NS.A (RUN) ENTER YOUR
NAME AND AGE (NAME,AGE)?_




                                   Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 21
DATA item list Lets you store data inside your program to be accessed by READ statements. The
data items will be read sequentially, starting with the first item in the first DATA statement, and ending
with the last item in the last DATA statement. Items in a DATA list may be string or numeric constants
— no expressions are allowed. If your string values include leading blanks, colons or commas, you
must enclose these values in quotes.

It is important that the data types in aDATA statement match up with the variable types in the
corresponding READ statement. DATA statements may appear anywhere it is convenient in a
program. Generally, they are placed consecutively, but this is not required.

Examples: 500 READ N1S.NZ5.N1.N2 !Q00 DATA "SMITH, J. R. "."WILSON. T.M.' 2000 DATA
130,175

See READ, RESTORE.

READ item list

Instructs the Computer to read a value from a DATA statement and assign that value to the specified
variable. The first time a READ is executed, the first value in the first DATA statement will be used;
the second time, the second value in the DATA statement will be read. When all the items in the first
DATA statement have been read, the next READ will use the first value in the second DATA
statement; etc. (An Out-of-Data error occurs if there are more attempts to READ than there are DATA
items.) The following program illustrates a common application for READ/DATA statements.
    50 PRINT "NAME", "AGE"
    100 READ N3
    110 IF NS="END" PRINT "ENDOF I_IST":END
    120 READ AGE
    130 IF AGE < 18 PRINT NS, AGE
    140 GOTO100
    150 DATA "SMITH, JOHN", 30, "ANDERSON, T.M. ",20
    160 DATA "JONES, BILL", 3, DOE,SALLY",2I
    1
    ,-
    170 DATA 'COLLINS, W. P.", 17, END
    RUN
    NAME AGE
    JONES, BILL 15
    COLLINS.V/.P. 17
    END OF LIST
READY >_ The program locates and prints all the minors' names from the data supplied. Note the
use of an END string to allow READing lists of unknown length.

See DATA, RESTORE




                                  Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 22
RESTORE Causes the next READ statement executed to start over with the first item in the first
DATA statement. This lets your program re-use the same DATA lines. Example: too READ X 1 to
RESTORE 120 READ Y 130 PRINT X,Y 140 DATA 50. SO

Because of the RESTORE statement, the second READ statement starts over with the first DATA
item.

See READ, DATA

PRINT #-1, item list Prints the values of the specified variables onto cassette tape. (Recorder must be
properly connected and set in Record mode when this statement is executed.) The PRINT *
statement must always specify a device number. This is because the TRS-80 can actually
input/output to two cassette machines, once you've added the Expansion Interface described in
Chapter 10. For normal use with just one recorder connected, the device number must be -1, e.g.,
PRINT     #-1    (followed     by   a     comma      and     then   the    item    list). Example:    5
A1=-30.334:BS=-"STRING-VALUE" 10 PRINT#-1.A1.BS. "THAT'S ALL"

This stores the current values of Al and BS. and also the string-literal "THAT'S ALL". The values may
be input from tape later m-.r.g. the INPUT* statement. The INPLT- sTjterr.erii must be identical :o the
PRINT* statement in terms of number and tvpe of items in the PR1NT#/INPUT* lists. See INPUT* .


Special Note:
ir: Hem /.'»; rr,::il The values re present-.'-. I no! exceed 255 ch if:icter-> tola!; otherwiseall .h meters
a:vr .'... !:r-; 255 ..:!! "e tr.;r^Ji-'.i

For example, PRINT *-1.A = .3 = .C=.D3.;:=.Fs.G = .H::,!~.J-. AS will probably exceed Ihe maximum
rj..ird l.-n^ili u \S :< Y;...>t than about 75 characters. In such a case. A> would not tv recorded. and
when you try to 1NPUT#-1 the data, an Ol.) (Out of Daia)

B'.T ;: " ' — error will occur.

_::^^i_:_ - :-_":

3/io

INPUT #-1, item list Inputs the specified number of values stored on cassette and assigns them to the
specified vjriable names. Like the PRINT* statement, INPUT* requires that you specify a device
number. (This will make more sense when you have added the Expansion Interface and are using a
dual cassette system. See Chapter 10.) Use Device number -I for normal applications without the
Expansion Interface, e.g., INPUT*- 1, list. Example: 50 INPUT *-l,X.PS.TJ

When this statement is executed, the Computer will tum on the tape machine, input values in the
order specified, then tum off the tape machine and advance to the next statement. If a string is
encountered when the INPUT list calls for a number, a bad file data error will occur. If there are not
enough data items on the tape to "fill" the INPUT statement, an Out of Data error will occur.

The Input list must be identical to the Print list that created the taped data-block (same number and
type of variables in the same sequence.)




                                   Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 23
Sample Program Use the two-line program supplied in the PRINT* description to create a short data
file. Then rewind the tape to the beginning of the data file, make ail necessary connections, and put
cassette machine in Play mode. Now run the following program. 10 INPUT*-1.A!.BS,LS 20 PRINT
A1.9S.LS 30 IF L3="THAT'S ALL"END 40 GOTO 10

This program doesn't care how long or short the data file is, so long as:

1) the file was created by successive PRINT** statements identical in form to line 10 2) the last item in
the last data triplet is "THAT'S ALL".




                                  Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 24
4 / Program Statements

LEVEL II BASIC makes several assumptions about how to run your programs. For example: *
Variables are assumed to be single-precision (unless you use type declaration characters — see
Chapter 1, "Variable Types"). * A certain amount of memory is automatically set aside for strings and
arrays - whether you use all of It or not. * Execution is sequential, starting with the first statement in
your program and ending with the last.

The statements described in this chapter let you over-ride these assumptions, to give jroar programs
much more versatility and power. NOTE: Ali LEVEL II statements except INPUT and INPUT* can be
used in the Command Mode as well as in the Execute Mode.

Statements described in this chapter:

Tests Type Assignment Sl Sequence of (Conditional Definition Allocation Execution Statements)
DEFINT CLEAR n END IF DEFSNO DIM STOP THEN DEFDBL LET GOTO ELSE OEFSTR GOSUB
ON GOTO . . .

ON GOSUB . . .

FOR-NEXT-STEP ERROR ON ERROR GOTO RESUME REM This chapter also contains a
discussion of data conversion in LEVEL II BASIC; this wilt let you predict and control the way results
of expressions, constants, etc., will be stored — as integer, single precision or double precision.

DEFINT letter range Variables beginning with any letter in the specified range will be stored and
treated as integers, unless a type declaration character is added to the variable name. This lets you
conserve memory, since

aaaa 4/1

integer values take up less memory than other numeric types. And integer arithmetic is faster than
single or double precision arithmetic. However, a variable~de fined as integer cart only take on values
between —32768 and +32767 inclusive.

Examples: 10 DEFINT A, I.N After line 10, all variables beginning with A, I or N will be treated as
integers. For example," Al, AA, 13 and NN will be integer variables. However, At #, AA#, I3» would
still be double precision variables, because of the type declaration characters, which always over-ride
DEF statements. to DCFINT l-N Causes variables beginning with I, J, K, L, M or N to be treated as
integer variables.

DEFINT may be placed anywhere in a program, but it may change the meaning of variable references
without type declaration characters. Therefore it is normally placed at the beginning of a program.

See DEFSNG, DEFDBL, and Chapter I, "Variable Types".

DEFSNG tetter range Causes any variable beginning with a letter in the specified range to be stored
and treated as single precision, unless a type declaration character is added. Single precision
variables and constants are stored with 7 digits of precision and printed out with 6 digits of precision.
Since all numeric variables are assumed to be single precision unless DEFined otherwise, the



                                  Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 25
DEFSNG statement is primarily used to re-define variables which have previously been defined as
double precision or integer.

Example: 100 DCFSNG I. W-Z Causes variables beginning with the letter I or any letter W through Z
to be treated as single precision. However, 1% would still be an integer variable, and I# a double
precision variable, due to the use of type declaration characters.

See DEFINT, DEFDBL, and Chapter 1, "Variable Types".

DEFDBL letter range Causes variables beginning with any letter in the specified range to be stored
and treated as double-precision, unless a type declaration character is added. Double precision
allows 17 digits of precision; 16 digits are displayed when a double precision variable is PRINTed.

im.'i.'.,!.,.u'.. ..".. "-..'."' :J :;y - y."..7.T v.

Example: 10 DEFDBL S-Z, A-E Causes variables beginning with one of the letters S through Z or A
through E to be double precision.

DEFDBL is normally used at the beginning of a program, because it may change the meaning of
variable references without type declaration characters.

See DEFINT, DEFSNG, and Chapter 1, "Variable Types".

DEFSTR letter range "Causes variables beginning with one of the letters in the specified range to be
stored and treated as strings, unless a type declaration character is added. If you have CLEARed
enough string storage space, each string can store up to 255 characters.

Example: 10 OEFSTR L-Z Causes variables beginning with any letter L through Z to be string
variables, unless a type declaration character is added. After line 10 is executed, the assignment LI -
"WASHINGTON" will be valid.

See CLEAR n. Chapter 1 , "Variable Types", and Chapter 5.

CLEAR n When used with an argument n (n can be a constant or an expression), this statement
causes the Computer to set aside n bytes for string storage. In addition all variables are set to zero.
When the TRS-80 is turned on, 50 bytes are automatically set aside for strings.

The amount of string storage CLEARed must equal or exceed the greatest number of characters
stored in string variables during execution; otherwise an Out of String Space error will occur.

Example: 10 CLEAR 1000 .Makes 1000 bytes available for string storage.

By setting string storage to the exact amount needed, your program can make more efficient use of
memory. A program which uses no string variables could include a CLEAR statement, for example.
The CLEAR argument must be non-negative, or an error will result.

DIM name (diml, dim!, . . ., dirnK) Lets you set the "depth" (number of elements allowed per dimen-
sion) of an array or list of arrays. If no DIM statement is used, a depth of 1 1 (subscripts 0-10) is
allowed for each dimension of each array used.

Example: 10 DIM A(5),B(2,3),CS(20J Sets up a one-dimension array A with subscripted elements
0-5; a two-dimension array B with subscripted'elements 0,0 to 2,3; and. a one-dimension string array
CS with subscripted elements 0-20. Unless previously defined otherwise, arrays A and B will contain




                                             Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 26
single-precision values.

DIM statements may be placed anywhere in your program, and the depth specifier may be a number
or a numerical expression.

Example: 40 INPUT "NUMBER OF NAMES";N SO DIM NA(N,2)

To re-dimension an array, you must first use a CLEAR statement,, either with or without an argument.
Otherwise an error will result.

Example Program: 10 AA(4) • 11.3 20 DIM AA{7) RUN tOO ERROR IN 20

See Chapter 6, ARRAYS.

LET variable = expression May be used when assigning values to variables. RADIO SHACK LEVEL II
does not require LET with assignment statements, but you might want to use it to ensure compatibility
with those versions of BASIC that do require it.

Examples: 100 LET A3-"A ROSE IS A ROSE" 110 LET B1-1.23 120 LETX-X-21 In each, case, the
variable on the left side of the equals sign is assigned the value of the constant or expression on the
right side.

END Terminates execution normally (without a BREAK message). Some versions of BASIC require
END as the last statement in a program; with LEVEL II it is optional. END is primarily used to force
execution to terminate at some point other than the logical end of the program.

Example: 10 INPUT 51,52 20 GOSUB 100
    99 END
    100 H-SQR(S!*S1 -
110 RETURN

The END statement in line 99 prevents program control from "crashing" into the subroutine. Now line
100 can only be accessed by a branching statement such as 20 GOSUB 100.

STOP Interrupts execution and prints a BREAK IN line number message. STOP is primarily a
debugging aid. During the break in execution, you can examine or change variable values. The
command CONT can then be used to re-start execution at the point where it left off. (If the program
itself is altered during a break, CONT cannot be used.)

Example: 10 X-RND(IO) 1 5 STOP ZO GOSUB 1000

BREAK IN 13 READY

Suppose we want to examine what value for X is being passed to the subroutine beginning at line
1000. During the break, we can examine X with PRINT X. (You can delete line 1 5 after the program
is debugged.)

GOTO line number Transfers program control to the specified line number. Used alone, GOTO line
number results in an unconditional (or automatic) branch; however, test statements may precede the
GOTO to effect a con- ditional branch.

Example: 200 GOTO 10 When 200 is executed, control will automatically jump back to line 10.




                                 Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 27
You can use GOTO in the Command Mod.' as an alter; GOTO ///if number causes execution ro bceiri
at the sn number, without an automatic CLEAR. Tills lets you ,

assigned in the Command Mode to variables in the Exi

See IF.THEN.ELSE.ON... GOTO.

GOSUB /7/ze number Transfers program control to the subroutine beginning at t!ie specified line
number. When the Computer encounters a RETURN statement in the subroutine, it will then return
control to the statement which follows GOSUB. GOSUB, like GOTO may be preceded by a test
statement. Sea IF.THEN.ELSE.ON... GOSUB.

Example Program: 100 GOSUB 200 110 PRINT "BACK FROM SUBROUTINE": END 200 PRINT
"EXECUTING THE SUBROUTINE" 210 RETURN

(RUN) EXECUTING THE SUBROUTINE BACK FROM THE SUBROUTINE Control branches from
line 100 to the subroutine beginning at line 200. Line 210 instructs Computer to return to the
statement immediately following GOSUB, that is, line 110.

RETURN Ends a subroutine and returns control to statement immediately following the most recently
executed GOSUB. 11' RETURN is encountered without execution of a matching GOSUB, an error will
occur. See GOSUB.

ON n GOTO line number, .... line number This is a multi-way branching statement that is controlled by
a test variable or expression. The general format for ON n GOTO is:

ON expression goto 1st line number, 2nd line number, .... K:h line expression must be between (J and
255 inclusive.

When ON . . . GOTO is executed, first Ihe expression is evaluated and the integer portion . . .
INT(expression) ... is obtained. We'll refer to this integer portion as J. The Computer counts over to
the Jth

element in the line-number list, and then branches to the line number specified by that element. IF
there is no Jth element (that is, if J > K in the general format above), then control passes to the next
statement in the program.

If the test expression or number is less than zero, an error will occur. The line-number list may contain
any number of items.

For example, 100 ON Ml GOTO ISO, 160, 170, T30, 180 says "Evaluate MI. If integer portion of MI
equals I then go to line ISO; If it equals 2, then go to 160; If it equals 3, then go to 170; If it equals 4,
then go to 150; If it equals 5, then go to 180; If the integer portion of MI doesn't equal any of the
numbers 1 through 5, advance to the next statement in the program."

Sample Program Using on n GOTO 100 INPUT "ENTER A NUMBEB":X 200 ON SGN(X)*2 GOTO
Z20.230.2dO 220 PRINT "NEGATIVE":END 230 PRINT "ZERO";END 240 PRINT "POSITIVE";END

SGN(X) retunu - 1 for X less than zero; for X equal to zero; and +1 for X greater than 0. By adding 2,
the expression takes on the values 1, 2, and 3, depending on whether X is negative, zero, or positive.
Control then branches to the appropriate line number.




                                   Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 28
ON n GOSUB line number, . . ., tine number Works like ON n GOTO, except control branches to one
of the subroutines specified by the line numbers in the line-number list.

Example: 100 INPUT "CHOOSE I. 2 OR 3":I tOS ON GOSUB 200,300,400 I
    110 END
    200 PRINT "SUBROUTINE #I";RETURN
    300 PRINT "SUBROUTINE #2":RETURN
    «00 PRINT "SUBROUTINE #3":RETURN
The test object n may be a numerical constant, variable or expression. It must have a non-negative
value or an error will occur.

See ON n GOTO.

FOR name -exp TO exp STEP exp NEXT name Opens an iterative (repetitive) loop so that a
sequence of program statements may be executed over and over a specified number of times. The
general form is (brackets indicate optional material):

line # for counter-variable = initial value TO final value [step increment] [program statements]

line # next [counter-variable] In the FOR statement, initial value, final value and increment can be
constants, variables or expressions. The first time the FOR statement is executed, these three are
evaluated and the values are saved; if the variables are changed by the loop, it will have no effect on
the loop's operation. However, the counter variable must not be changed or the loop will not operate
normally.

The FOR-NEXT-STEP loop works as follows: the first time the FOR statement is executed, the
counter is set to the "initial value." Execution proceeds until a NEXT statement is encountered. At this
point, the counter is incremented by the amount specified in the STEP increment. (If the increment
has a negative value, then the counter is actually decremented.) If STEP increment is not used, an
increment of 1 is assumed.

Then the counter is compared with the final value specified in the FOR statement. If the counter is
greater than the final value, the loop is completed and execution continues with the statement
following the NEXT statement. (If increment was a negative number, loop ends when counter is less
than final value.) If the counter has not yet exceeded the final value, control passes to the first
statement after the FOR statement.

Example Programs: 10 FOR 1-10 TO 1 STEP -1 20 PRINT I ;
    30 NEXT
10 9 6 7 S 5 4

FOR K = TO 1 STEP .3 PRINT K; NEXT

After K= 9 is incremented by .3. K=1.2. This is greater than the final value 1 . therefore loop ends
without ever printing/i/w/ value.
    10 FOR >4TO0
    20 PRINT K;
    30 NEXT



                                  Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 29
No STEP is specified, so STEP 1 is assumed After K is incremented the first time, its value is 5. Since
5 is greater than the final value 0. the loop cads.

10 J=3 : K=S : L=2 20 FOR l-J TO K*1 STEP L 25 J=0 K=0 : : J=0 30 PRINT I; 40 NEXT

.The variables and expressions in line 20 are evaluated once and these values become constants for
tru- FOR-NEXT-STEP loop. Changing the variable values later has no effect on the loop.

FOR-NEXT loops may be "nested": 10 FOR I-1T03 20 PRINT "OUTER LOOP" 30 FOR J = TO 2 l
      40 PRINT " INNER LOOP"
      50 NEXT J
      60 NEXT I
Br*.fl",',, "':! ": : ::: t 1

:: • : i

; ; ;; •• ,• , — RUN OUTER LOOP INNER LOOP INNER LOOP OUTER LOOP INNER LOOP INNER
LOOP OUTER LOOP INNER LOOP INNER LOOP Note that each NEXT statement specifies the
appropriate counter variable; however, this is just a programmer's convenience to help keep track of
the nesting order. The counter variable may be omitted from the NEXT statements. But if you do use
the counter variables, you must use them in the right order; i.e., the counter variable for the innermost
loop must come first. It is also advisable to specify the counter variable with NEXT statements when
your program allows branching to program lines outside the FOR-NEXT loop.

Another option with nested NEXT statements is to use a counter variable list.

Delete line 50 from the above program and change line 60:
      60 NEXT J,
      Loops may be nested 3-deep, 4-deep, etc. The only limit is the
      amount of memory available.
ERROR code Lets you "simulate" a specified error during program execution. The major use of this
statement is for testing an ON ERROR GOTO routine. When the ERROR code sratement is
encountered, the Com- puter will proceed exactly as if that kind of error had occurred. Refer to
Appendix B for a listing of error codes and their meanings.

Example Program: 100 ERROR 1

?NF ERROR READY

1 is the error code for "attempt to execute NEXT statement without

a matching FOR statement".

See ON ERROR GOTO, RESUME.

ON ERROR GOTO line number When the Computer encounters any kind of error in your program,
itnormally breaks out of execution and prints an error message. With ON ERROR GOTO, you can set
up an error-trapping routine which will allow your program to "recover" from an efror and continue,
without any break in execution. Normally you have a particular type of error in mind when you use the
ON ERROR GOTO statement. For example, suppose your program performs some division



                                  Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 30
operations and you have not ruled out the possibility of division by zero. You might want to write a
routine to handle a division-by-zero error, and then use ON ERROR GOTO to branch to that routine
when such an error occurs.

Example: 5 ON ERROR GOTO 100 10 C - 1/0 In this "loaded" example, when the Computer attempts
to execute line 10, a dividc-by-zero error will occur. But because of line 5, the Computer will simply
ignore line 10 and branch to the error- handling routine beginning at line 100.
     NOTE: The ON ERROR GOTO must be executed before the error occurs or it will have no effect.

The ON ERROR GOTO statement can be disabled by executing an ON ERROR GOTO 0. If you use
this inside an error-trapping routine, BASIC will handle the current error normally. The error handling
routine must be terminated by a RESUME statement. See RESUME.

RESUME line number Terminates an error handling routine by specifying where normal execution is
to resume.

RESUME without a line number and RESUME cause the Com- puter to return to the statement in
which the error occurred.

RESUME followed by a line number causes the Computer to branch to the specified line number.

RESUME NEXT causes the Computer to branch to the statement following the point at which the
error occurred.

Sample Program with an Error Handling Routine 5 ON ERROR GOTO 100 10 INPUT "SEEKING
SQUARE ROOT OF":X 20 PRINT SQR(X| 30 GOTO 10 100 PRINT "IMAGINARY ROOT:";
SQR(-X);"*!" 110 RESUME 10

RUN the program and try inpulfinj j r.:^;.\; vj! .:;. 1

REM Instructs the Computer ta ignore :'.•: r.-vt of th: p.-oeram li-.\ ri'.is

allows you to insert comments (REV.'.rks) into } our prcaru:: 1 for - .

documentation. Then, when you lor someone else) look .it a listing of your program, it'll be a lot easier
to figure out. If RLM is used in a multi-statement program line, it must be the Last state- ment.

Examples Program: 10 REM * " THIS REMARK INTRODUCES THE PROGRAM 20 REM ' • AND
POSSIBLY THE PROGRAMMER. TOO. 30 REM '
    40 REM '
    • THIS REMARK EXPLAINS WHAT THE
    50 REM '
    • VARIOUS VARIABLES REPRESENT:
    SO REM ' • C - CIRCUMFERENCE R-RADIUS
    70 REM '
    • D » DIAMETER
    10 REM
    90 INPUT RADIUS";R : REM THIS IS FIRST EXECUTABLE LINE
    The above program shows some of the graphic possibilities of RLM




                                     Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 31
    statements. Any alphanumeric character may be included in a REM
    statement, and the maximum length is the same as that of other
    statements: 255 characters total.
IN LEVEL II BASIC, an apostrophe "(SHIFT 7) may be used as an abbreviation for :REM. 100 ' THIS
TOO IS A REMARK IF true/false expression action-clause Instructs the Computer to test the following
lojiical or relational expression. If the expression is True, control will proceed to the "action" clause
immediately following the expression. If the expression is False, control will jump to the matching
ELSE state- ment (if there is one) or down to the next program line.

In numerical terms, if the expression has a non-zero value, it is always equivalent to a logical True.

Examples: 100 IF X>127 PRINT "OUT OF RANGE": END

ifX is greater than 2"\ control *i:i p-«> to ti:e print ^atcr-em 1

and then to Ihe END itaienu-nl. Hut u X :. niii greater than I"7 I ,

control will jump d.iw-i m the next lii'.e in the program, skipping the PRINT and END statements.
    100 IF 0<-X AND X< '90 THEN Y'X-1 30
If hoth expressions are I'ru; then Y vw!| bt assigned the '-- X+l SO. Otherwise control will pjss directly
to the ne xi pr.vjrj: :i ... .-, skipping the THEN clause.
     NOTE: THEN is option.il in the above and similar statements. How- ever, THEN is sometimes required to
     eliminate an ambiguity. For example. 400 if y-m then m-o won't work without THEN.

    500 INPUTAS: IF AJ-"YES" THEN 100
    600 INPUT AS IF A5-"YES" GOTO 100
    :
The two statements have the same effect. THEN is not optional in line 500 and other if expression
THEN line number statements.
    100 IF A>0AND8>0 PRINT "BOTH POSITIVE"
The test expression may be composed of several relational expressions joined by logical operators
AND and OR.

See THEN, ELSE.

THEN statement or line number Initiates the "action clause" of an IF-THEN type statement. THEN is
optionalexcept when it is used to specify a branch to another line number, as in IF A<o then 100.
THEN should also be used in IF-THEN-ELSE statements.

ELSE statement or line number Used after IF to specify an alternative action in case the IF test fails.
(When no ELSE statement is used, control falls through to the next program line after a test fails.)

Examples:
    100 INPUT AS : IF AS-"YE5" THEN 300 ELSE END
In line 100, if AS equals "YES" then the program branches to line 300. But it' AS does not equal
"YES", program skips over to the ELSE statement which then instructs the Computer to end
execution.



                                     Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 32
ZOO IF A<B PRINT"A<B"ELSE PRINT "B< -A"

If A is less than B. the Computer prints that fact, and then proceeds down to the next program line,
skipping the ELSE statement. If A is not less than B, Computer jumps directly to the ELSE state- ment
and prints the specified message. Then control passes to the next statement in the program.

ZOO IF A>001 THEN B-l/A : A - A/3 : ELSE 260

If A >. 001 is True, then the next two statements will be executed, assigning new values to B and A.
Then the program will drop down to the next line, skipping the FUSE statement. But if A>. 001 is

False,tlit program rumps directly over to the lil.SU stJiemtfrlt,

which then instructs it to branch to lire I:iO. Note that GO TO is not required afterELSE.

IF-THEN-ELSE statements may be nested, on; you :ia.e to lake care to mateh up [lie IEs and ELSEs.
    10 INPUT 'ENTER TWO NUMEIERS";A.B
    20 IF A< -B THEN IF A<B PRINT A;:ELSE PRINT " N E TH E F* M I ;: E LSE PRINT E
    30 PRINT"15 SMALLER-
RUN the program, inputting various pairs of numbers. The ;>rogram pieks out and prints the smaller
of any two numbers you enter. Note that the THEN statements and the colons may be omitted from
line 20.

Dnia Conversion Every number used during execution must be typed as either integer, single
precision or double precision. Often this typng involves converting a number from one form to
another. This may produce unexpected, confusing results -- unless you understand the rules
governing such automatic typing and type conversion.

Type Conversion Constants are the actual numbers (not the variable names) used by LEVEL II
BASIC during execution. They may appear in your program (as in X=l 3, the right side of the equation)
or they may be temporary (intermediate) constants created duri::g the evaluation of an expression. In
any ease, the following rules determine how a constant is typed:

I. If a constant contains 3 or more digits, or if D is used in the exponent, thai number is stored as
double precision. Adding a # declaration character also forces a constant to be stored as double
precision.

II. If thenumber is not double-precision, and if it is outside the range -}27i,i to +3 27r>7 or if it contains
a dec:i:'..il point, [hen the number is stored as -.w^lc-precision. If :.'.::i:-.er :s expressed in exponential
notation v/ith L pr;ce.i::v^ the exponent, the number is single precision,

IH. If neither I nor II is true of the constant, then it is .stored as an integer.

Example Program: 10 PRINT I.2343S7. 1.2343578

1.23457 READY

The first constant contains 7 digits; so by Rules I and II, it becomes a single-precision number. Single
precision numbers .ire printed as 6 digits with the least significant digit properly rounded. But the
second constant contains H dieits, therefore by Rule it becomes a I




                                     Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 33
double precision number, stored internally as I.2.S45MSOUO0OOOOO. The number is printed out
with all eight significant digits showing, and all the trailing zeros suppressed.

Typing of Constants When operations are performed on one or two numbers, the result /mist be typed
as integer, double or single-precision.

When a +, -, or * operation is performed, the result will have the same degree of precision as the most
precise operand. For example, if one operand is single-precision, and the other double-precision,

the result will be double precision. Only when both operands are integers will a result be integer. If the
result of an integer *, -, or + operation is outside the integer range, the operation will be done in single
precision and the result stored as single precision.

Division follows the same rules as +, * and -, except that it is never done at the integer level: when
both operators are integers, the operation is done in single precision with a single-precision result.

During a compare operation (< >.=.etc.) the operands are converted ,

to the same type before they are compared. The less precise type will always be converted to the
more precise type.

If you are using logical operators for bit manipulations or Boolean operations (see Chapter 8. "Logical
Operators"), you'll need to read the next paragraph: otherwise, skip it.

The logical operators AND. OR and NOT first convert their operands to integer form. If one of the
operands is outside the allowable ransw for integers (-32768 to +32767) an overflow error occurs.
The result of a logical operation is always an integer.

Effects of Type Conversions on Accuracy When a number is converted to integer type, it is "rounded
down"; i.e.. the largest integer which is not greater than the number is used.

(This is the" same thine; that happens when the INT function is applied to the number.)

When a number is converted from double to single precision, it is "4. 5 rounded" (the least significant
digit is rounded up if the ;

fractional part > =5. Otherwise it is left unchanged).

variables In the following, examples^ keep.in mind that single precision arc stored with 7 digits of
precision, but printed out with 6 digits

(to allow for proper rounding). Similarly, double precision values are

stored with 17 digits but printed out with only 16.

Example Programs: 10 a#= 1.6666666666666667 20 BT-A# 30 C% = A# 40 PRINT Bl.C* RUN
1.66667 1

READY

When a single precision number is converted to double precision, only the seven most significant
digits will be accurate. And if the single

precision number didn't contain seven significant digits, watch out!

Examples:



                                   Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 34
1.299999952316234 READY

A# = 2/3 PRINT Atf

.6666565865348816 READY

2/3 is converted to a single precision constant; therefore only the firstseven digits of A# are accurate.

Af= = 2/3* PRINT A#

.S666666666665S667 READY

gg g gBUCSi

Since the expression 2/3* is evaluated as a double precision constant, all 1 6 digits of A# are
accurate, with the least significant properly 4/5— rounded.

When assigning a constant value to a double precision variable, be sure to include as many
significant digits as possible (up to 7). 1

If your constant has seven or less significant digits, you might as well use single precision.

Examples: 1 Pl#"3.1 4 1 3926333897932 ZO E#-2.71 8281 8284590432

asaaznaagc 4/17




                                  Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 35
5 / Strings

"Without string-handling capabilities, a computer is just a super-powered calculator." There's an
element of truth in that exaggeration; the more you use the string capabilities of LEVEL II, the truer
the state- ment will seem.

LEVEL BASIC offered two string variables which I

could be input and output to make your programs look "friendly" (as in HELLO, bobi). In LEVEL II you
can do much more than that. First of all, you're not limited to two strings — any valid variable name
can be used to contain string values, by the DEFSTR statement or by adding a type declaration
character to the name. And each string can contain up to 255 characters.

Moreover, you can compare strings in LEVEL II, to alphabetize them, for example. You can take
strings apart and string them together (concatenate them). For background material to this chapter,
see Chapter 1 ,"Variable Types" and "Glossary", and Chapter 4, DEFSTR.

Subjects and functions covered in this chapter:

"String Input/Output" fre (string) MIDS "String Comparisons" INKEYS RIGHTS "String Operations"
LEN STRS ASC LEFTS STRINGS CHRS VAL 1NSTRING Subroutine

String Input/Output String constants —sequences of alphanumeric characters — may be input to a
program just as numeric constants are input, using rNPUT, READ/DATA, and INPUT # (input from
cassette). They ma> generally be input without quotes:
    10 INPUT "YES OR NO";RS
    20 IF RS-'-YES-PRINT'^THAT'S BEING POSIT! VEI":END
    30 PRINT "WHY NOT?"
    RUN
    yes or NO?_[you typel yes
    THAT'S BEING POSITIVE!
    f^^ f
READY

=sa However, to input a string constant which contains commas, colons, or leading blanks, the string
must be enclosed in quotes.
    10 INPUT "LAST NAME, FIRST NAME";N$
    20 PRINT NS
    RUN
    LAST NA ME. FIRST NAME7 _ [you type:] "SMITH. JOHN"
    oznxi
    SMITH. JOHN
    READY




                                 Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 36
The same rule regarding commas, colons and leading blanks applies to values input via DATA
statements and INPUT # statements.
    10 READ T$, N*. DSJ
    20 PRINT TS;NSJ;DS
    30 DATA "TOTAL IS: "/'ONE THOUSAND, TWO HUNDRED
    40 DATA DOLLARS.
    TS requires quotes because of the colon;
    NS requires quotes because of the comma.
String Comparisons Strings may be compared for equality or alphabetic precedence. When they are
checked for equality, every character, including any leading or trailing blanks, must be the same or
the test fails.

COO IFZS-"ENO"THEN999 Strings'are compared character-for-character from left to right. Actually
the ASCII codes for the characters are compared, and the character with the lower code number is
considered to precede the other character. (See Appendix C, ASCII Codes.)

For example, the constant "A!" precedes the constant **A#", because "!" (ASCII code: decimal 33)
precedes "#" (ASCII code: decimal 35). When strings of differing lengths are compared, the shorter
string is precedent if its characters are the same as those in the longer string. For example, "A"
precedes "A The following relational symbols may be used to compare strings; <> < o > >-

Note: Whenever 3 string constant is used in a comparison expression or an assignment statement,
the constant must be enclosed in quotes:

AS--CONSTANT" IF AS - "CONSTANT" PRINT A$ (The quotes are required in both cases.) lupa
gsssrS=!SZ S3 SZS 35ZZ 5 i "-"-" I .. r-rrrr

isarasEsaac

String Operations Not including the functions described below, there is only one string operation -
concatenation, represented by the plus symbol +.

Example Programs: 10 CLEAR 75 20 AS-"A ROSE" 30 B$»" IS A ROSE" 40 CS=-AS+BS+B$+BS+"."
50 PRINT CS RUN A ROSE IS A ROSE IS A ROSE IS A ROSE. READY

In line 40, the strings are concatenated - strung together.

to TS-"I0O" 20 SUBS-"5" 30 CODE$«'*32L" 40 LC3«TS+"."+SUB3+CODE3 SO PRINT LCS RUN
I00.332L READY

ASC (string) Returns the ASCII code (in decimal form) for the first character of the specified string.
The string-argument must be enclosed in parentheses. A null-string argument will cause an error to
occur.
    100 PRINT ASCf'A")
    1 10 TS-"A»": PRINT ASC(T$)
    Lines 100 and 1 10 will print the same number.
The argument may be an expression involving string operators and functions:
    200 PRINT ASC|RIGHTS(T$,1))



                                  Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 37
Refer to the ASCII Code Table, Appendix C. Note that the ASCII code for a lower-case letter is equal
to that letter's upper-case ASCII code plus 31. So ASC may be used to convert upper-case values to

lower-case values - useful in case you have a lint printer with lower- case capabilities and the proper
intcrfacingliardware/sottware).

ASC may also be used to create coding/decoding procedures (see example at end of this chapter).

CHR$ (expression) Performs the inverse of the ASC function: returns a one-character string whose
character has the specified ASCII, controller graphics code. The argument may be any number from
to 255, or any variable

expression with a value in that range. Argument must be enclosed in parentheses.

100 print chrs(35) prints a pound-sign #

Using CHRS, you can even assign quote-marks (normally used as • is 34. st ring-deiim iters) to
strings. The ASCII code for quotes

So AS=CHRS(34) assigns the value " to AS.

100 AS-CHRS(34) 1 10 PRINT'HE SAID. ";AS;"HELLO.";A$

HE SAID, "HELLO." READY

CHRS may also be used to display any of the 64 graphics characters. (See Appendix C, Graphics
Codes.)
    10 CLS
    20 FOR 1*129 TO 191
    30 PRINT l;CHRS(l),
    40 NEXT
    30 GOTO 30
    (RUN the program to see the various graphics characters.)
Codes 0-3 1 are display control codes. Instead of returning an actual display character, they return a
control character. When the control character is PRINTed, the function is performed. For example, 23
is the code for 32 character-per-line format; so the command, PRINT CHRS(23) converts the display
format to 32 characters per line. (Hit CLEAR, or execute CLS, to return to 64 character-per-line
format.)

FRE (string) When used with a string variable or string constant as an argument, returns the amount
of string storage space currently available. Argument must be enclosed in parentheses.
    500 PRINT FRE(AS^, FRE(LS). FRE("Z")
Ail return the same value.

The string used has no significance; it is a dummy variable. See Chapter 4, CLEAR n.

INKEYS Returns a one-character string determined by an instantaneous key- board strobe. If no key
is pressed during the strobe, a null string (length zero) is returned. This is a very powerful function
because it lets you input values while the Computer is executing - without using the BHB3 key. The
popular video games which let you



                                 Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 38
fire at will, guide a moving dot through a maze, play tennis, etc., may all be simulated using the
INKEYS function (plus a lot of other program logic, of course). Characters typed to an INKEYS are
not automatically displayed on the screen. Because of the short duration of the strobe cycle (on the
order of microseconds) INKEYS is invariably placed inside some sort of loop, so that the Keyboard is
scanned repeatedly.

Example Program: 10 CL5 100 PRINT 9 540.1NKEYS : GOTO 100 RUN the program; notice that the
screen remains blank until the first time you hit a key. The last key hit remains on the screen until you
hit another one. (Whenever you fail to hit a key during a keyboard strobe, a null string, i.e., "nothing",
is PRINTed at 540. This "nothing" has no effect on the currently displayed character at 540.)

INKEYS may be used in sequences of loops to allow the user to build up a longer string.

Example: 90 PRINT "ENTER THREE CHARACTERS" 100 ASMNKEYS IF AS- M "THEN 00 ELSE
PRINT AS ; t

10 1 8S"INKEY3 IF BS«""THEN 10 ELSE PRINT BS : 1

120 CS'INKEYS IF CS'""THEN 120 ELSE PRINT CS: :

130 DS=A3*S3+CS A three-character string DS can now be entered via the keyboard without using
the j^'mj key.
     NOTE: The statement if as-" " compares AS trythenull string.

LEFT$ (string, n) Returns the first n characters of string. The Arguments must be enclosed in quotes,
string may be a string constant or expression, and n may be a numeric expression.

Example Program: 10 AS-"T1MOTHY" 20 BS»LEFTS(A5.3) 30 PRINTBS;"-THAT'S SHORT FOR M
;AS RUN TIM-THAT'S SHORT FOR TIMOTHY READY

LEN (string) Returns the character length of the specified string. The string variabIe,expresston, or
constant must be enclosed in parentheses.

10 AS-"" 20 BS-"TOM" 30 PRINT AS.BS.BS+BS 40 PRINT LEN(AS).LEN(B$].L.EN(BS+BS)

TOMTOM READY >—

MID$ (string, p,n) Returns a substring of string with length n and starting at position p. The string
name, length and starting position must be enclosed in parentheses, string may be a string constant
or expression, and n and p may be numeric expressions or constants. For example, MlDS(LS.3.l )
refers to a one-character string beginning with the 3rd character of LS.

Example Program: The first three digits of a local phone number are sometimes called the
"exchange" of the number. This program looks at a complete phone number (area code, exchange,
last four digits) and picks out the exchange of that number. 10 INPUT "AREA CODE AND NUMBERS
(NO HYPHENS, BLEASEJ" 20 EXS-MIDS(PHS, 4, 3) JO PRINT "NUMBER IS IN THE ";EXS;"
EXCHANGE."

Ii

... . ... ;.= B.JPJIIJIWMIBU If no argument is specified for the length n, the entire string begin- ning at
position p is returned.




                                   Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 39
RIGHTS {string, n) Returns the last n characters of string, string and n must be enclosed in
parentheses, string may be a string constant or variable, and n may be a numerical constant or
variable. If l£N{string} is less than or equal to n, the entire string is returned.

RIGHTS(STS,4) returns the last A characters of STS.

STR$ {expression) Converts a numeric expression or constant to a string. The numeric expression or
constant must be enclosed in parentheses. STRS(A), for example, returns a string equal to the
character representation of the value of A. For example, if A-58.5, then STRS(A) equals the string **
58.5". (Note that a leading blank is inserted before "58.5" to allow for the sign of A). While arithmetic
operations may be performed on A, only string operations and functions may be performed on the
string "SS.S".

PRINT STRS(X) prints X without a trailing blank; PRINT X prints X with a trailing blank. Example
Program: 40 A-58.5 : »— 58.5 20 PRINT STRS(A) 30 PRINT 5TRS[B) 40 PRINT STRS(A+B) 50
PRINT STR5(A)+STR${B)

RUN 58.3 -51.5

58.5-58.5 READY

Note that the leading blank is filled by the minus sign in STR$(B).

STRINGS (n, character or number) Returns a string composed of n cAaracrer-symbols. For example,
STRINGS* 30,"*") returns »•••—••*•••••••*•••*••*•*••••" STRINGS is useful in creating graphs, tables,
etc. character can also be a number from 0-255; in this case, it will be treated as an ASCII, control, or
graphics code.

*J7

Example: STRlNGSlM.WI) returns a string composed of 64 graphics blocks. VAL tstangi Performs the
inverse oi ihe SIRS N:nci:.m. tr.\. :!ie number .-.

: represented by the characters in strin,* argurner.:. ;i or example, l

ifAS="12" and BS="34" then val(a3* '."-^931 return* the value ,

1 12.34. VAL[as«"E"-b$] returns the vjjue ] 2P54, ihjl is 2 x 10 * 1

VAL operates a little differently on mixed string* - strings whose values consist of a number followed
by alphanumeric characters. In such cases, only the leading number is used in determining VAL; the
alphanumeric remainder is ignored.

For example: VAL ("ICO DOLLARS") returns 100.

This can be a handy short-cut in examining addresses, for example.

Example Program: 10 REM "WHAT SIDE OF THE STREET?" 15 REM EVEN=NORTH. ODD =
SOUTH 20 INPUT '-ADDRESS: NUMBER AND STREET"; AOS 30 C-INT(VAL(ADS),'2)*2 40 IF
C=>VAL|ADS) PRINT "NORTH SIDE": GOTO ZO 50 PRINT "SOUTH SIDE": GOTO 20

RUN the program, entering street addresses like "1015 SEVENTH AVE".

Coding/Decoding Program for Illustration Only 5 CLS: PRINT CHRS(23) 10 CLEAR 1000 20 INPUT
"ENTER MESSAGE": MS 30 FOR K-1 TO LENIMS) 40 TS»MID3(M5. K, I] 60 CO-ASC(TS) + 3: IF


                                   Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 40
CD>255 CD=CD-255 70 NUS = NU5 + CHR3iCD) 80 NEXT 90 PRINT "THE CODED MESSAGE IS"
100 PRINT NUS 110 FOR K> TO LENfNUSI t

120 TS-MID3(NUS. K. 1) 130 CD = ASC(T3)-5: IF CD<0 CD = CD«-255 140 OLD3 =
OLD5*CHR5iCD) 130 NEXT 160 PRINT "THE DECODED MESSAGE IS" t70 PRINT OLDS

RUN the program.

Lines 30-80 and 1 10-150 demonstrate how you can "peel off" the characters of a string for
examination. Linos 00 and 130 demonstrate manipulation of ASCII codes.

lustring Subroutine Using the inlrinvc string functions MIDS and LEN, it's easy to create a very hindy
string-handling subroutine, INSTRING. This function takes two string arguments and tests to see
whether one is contained in the other. When you are searching for a particular word, phrase or piece
of data in a larger body of text or data, INSTRING can be very powerful. Here's the subroutine: 999
END THIS IS A PROTECTIVE END-BLOCK 1000 FOR = 1TO LEN(XS)-LEN{Y3)*1 l
     1010 IF Y$ = MID3(XS.[.LEN(YS)] RETURN
     1020 NEXT l>0 RETURN
     : :
To use the subroutine, first assign the value of the larger string (the "search area") to XS, and the
value of the desired substring to YS. Then call the subroutine with GOSLB. The subroutine will return
a value of which tells you the starting position of YS in the larger i

string XS:or if YS is not a substring of XS. is returned with a I

value of «ro.

Here's a sample program using the INSTRING subroutine. (Type in the above lines 999-1020 plus the
following.)

5 CLEAR 1000 CLS :
     10 INPUT "ENTER THE LONGER STRING" X3
     20 INPUT "NOW ENTER THE SHORTER STRING": Y3
     30 GOSUB 1000
     40 IF 1=0 THEN 70
     50 PRINT Y3," IS A SUBSTRING OF ":XS
     53 PRINT "STARTING POSITION :";l.
     60 PRINT "ENDING POSITION :" *LEN|Y5)-1 :l
     65 PRINT PRINT GOTO 10
     : :
     70 PRINT Y3;" IS NOT CONTAINED IN ";X3
     B0 GOTO 1
RUN the program, entering the string to be searched and then the desired substring.

. .^irillLMHin-,'. ', J.-.^,




                                   Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 41
6 / Arrays

An array is simply an ordered list of values. In LEVEL II these values may be either numbers or
strings, depending on how the array is defined or typed. Arrays provide a fast and organized way of
handling large amounts of data. To illustrate the power of arrays, this chapter traces the development
of an array to store checkbook data: check numbers, dates written, and amounts for each check.

In addition, several matrix manipulation subroutines are listed at the end of this chapter. These
sequences will letyou add, multiply, transpose, and perform other operations on arrays.

Note: Throughout this chapter, zero-subscripted elements are generally ignored for the sake of sim-
plicity. But you should remember they are available and should be used for the most efficient use of
memory. For example, after DIM A(4), array A contains 5 elements: A(0), A(l), A(2), A(3), A(4).

For background information on 3rrays, see Chapter 4, DIM, and Chapter 1 , "Arrays".

A Check-Book Array Consider the following table of checkboc.: information:

Check # Date Written Amount 025 1-1-73 10.00 026 1-5-73 39.95 027 1-7-78 23.50 028 1-7-73
149.50 029 1-10-78 4.90 030 1-15-78 12.49

Note that every item in the table may be specified simply by reference to two numbers: the row
number and the column number. For example, (row 3, column 3) refers to the amount 23.50. Thus the
number pair (3,i) may be called the "subscript address" of the value 23.50.

Let's set up an array, CK. to correspond to the checkbook informa- tion table. Since the table contains
6 rows and 3 columns, array CK will needtwo dimensions: one for row numbers, and one for column
numbers. We can picture the ;irr:iy like this:

A(6,l)=030 A(6.2)= 1.1578 A(6,3)=12.49

Notice thai the date information i recorded in the form mm.ddyy: »

where ni/n=month number, dd=dzy of month, and yy = last two digits of year. Since CSC is a numeric
array, we can't store the data with alpha-numeric characters such as dashes.

Suppose we assign the appropriate values to the array elements. Unless we have used a DIM
statement, the Computer will assume that our array requires a depth of 10 for each dimension. That
is, the Compute/ will set aside memory locations to hold CK(7,1), CK(7,2)
CK(9,l),CK(9,2)andCK(<),3). In this case, we don't want to set aside this much space, so we use the
DIM statement at the beginning of our program:
    10 DIMCK[6,3) 'SET UP A G BY 3 ARRAY (EXCL. ZERO SUBSCRIPTS)
Now let's add program steps to read the values into the array CK: 20 FOR ROW-1 TO 6 30 FOR
COL-1 TO 3 40 READ CK(ROW,COI_) 50 NEXT COL, ROW 90 DATA 025, 1.0178. 10,00 91 DATA
02S, 1.0578, 39.95 92 DATA 027. 1.0778, 23.50 93 DATA 028, 1.0778, 149.50 94 DATA 029, 1.1
078, 4.90 95 DATA 030, 1.1578, 12.49

Now that our array is set up, we can begin taking advantage of its For example, suppose we want to
add up all the built-in structure. checks written. Add the following lines to the program:


                                 Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 42
    100 FOR ROW-1 TO 6
    1 10 SUM-SUM + CK{ROW,3]
    120 NEXT
    130 PR INT "TOTAL OF CHECKS WRITTEN";
    140 PRINT USING"S5»»*.«»";SUM
Now let's add program steps to print oi.;t all checks that were writte
    200 PRINT "SEEKING CHECKS WRITTEN ON WHAT DATE [MM.DDYY)"
    210 INPUT DT
    Z30 PRINT :?RINT'*ANY CHECKS WRITTEN ARE LISTED BELOW:"
    240 PRINT"CHECK #". "AMOUNT" PRINT :
    250 FOR ROW-1 TO 6
    260 IF CK|ROW.Zl-DT PRINT CK(ROW.l). CK(ROW,3)
    270 NEXT
It's easy to generalize our program to handle checkbook information for all 1 2 months and for years
other than 1973.

All we do is increase the size (or "depth") of each dimension as needed. Let's assume our checkbook
includes check numbers 001 through 300, and we want to store the entire checkbook record. Just
make these changes:
    10 DIM CK(300.3) 'SET UP A 300 BY 3 ARRAY
    20 FOR ROW = TO 300 1
and add DATA lines for check numbers 001 through 300. You'd probably want to pack more data
onto each DATA line than we did in the above DATA lines.

And you'd change all the ROW counter final values: 100 FOR ROW=1 TO 300
    250 FOR ROW = TO 300 l
Other Types of Arrays Remember, in LEVEL II the number of dimensions an array can have (and the
size or depth of the jrray). is limited only by the amount of memory available. Also remember that
string arrays can be used. For example, CSlX) would automatically be interpreted as a string array.
And if you use DEFSTR A at the beginning of your program, any array whose nam; b -jitis with A
wjuld also be a string array. One obvious application for a >tri:iK array would be to store text material
for access by a string manipulation program.

10 CLEAR 1200 20 DIM TXT3110) would set up a string array capable of storing lines of text. 1

1200 bytes were CLEARed to allow for 10 sixty-character lines, plus 600 extra bytes for string
manipulation with other string variables.

Array/Matrix Manipulation Subroutines To use ibis subroutine, your main program must supply values
for Nl (rows* and N2 (columns*.
    30100 REM MATRIX INPUT SUBROUTINE [2 DIMENSION}
    301 10FOR 1=1 TO Nl
    30120 PRINT "INPUT RO'.V";!



                                  Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 43
    30130 FOR J = TO N2 1
    30140 INPUT A(I,J)
    30160 NEXT J.l
    30170 RETURN
To use this subroutine, your main program must supply values for Nl (dim* I). N2 (dim*2) and
N3(dim=.3).
    30200 REM MATRIX READ SUBROUTINE (3 DIMENSION)
    30205 REM REQUIRES DATA STMTS.
    30210 FOR K = TO N3
    1
    30220 FOR = TO Nl
    1 1
    30230 FOR J-1 TO N2
    30210 READ A(l.J.K)
    30270 NEXT J.I.K
    30280 RETURN
    Main program supplies values lor Nl, N2, N3, etc.
    30300 REM MATRIX ZERO SUBROUTINE (3 DIMENSION}
    30310 FOR K = TO N3 1
    30320 FOR J'l TO N2
    30330 FOR l-J TO Nl
    30340 A(I.J,K) =
    30370 NEXT I.J.K
    30380 RETURN
Main program supplies values for Nl, \'2, N'3.
    30400 REM MATRIX PRINT SUBROUTINE (3 DIMENSION)
    30410 FOR K = TO N3 1
    30420 FOR 1=1 TO NJ
    30430 FOR J-1 TO N2
    30440 PRINT A(I.J.K),
    30450 NEXT J:PRINT
    30460 NEXT I:PRINT
    30470 NEXT K:PR1NT
    30480 RETURN
Main program s-jpplies \ j!u;s Tor Nl. N2. N3.
    30500 REM MATRIX INPUT SUBROUTINE |3 DIMENSION)
    30510 FOR K = TO N3 'l
    30520 PRINT "PAGE".K




                                  Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 44
    30530 FOR 1=1 TO Nl
    30540 PRINT "INPUT ROW ":! 1
    30550 FOR J=l TO N2
    30560 INPUT A(I.J.K)
    30570 NEXT J
    30580 NEXT I
    30590 PRINTNEXT K
    30595 RETURN
Multiplication by a Single Variable: Scalar Multiplication (3 Dimensional)
    30600 FOR K-t TO N3:'N3=3RD DIMENSION
    30610 FORJ-I TO N2:'N2 = 2ND DIMENSION (ROWS)
    30620 FOR = TO N1:*N1-1ST DIMENSION (ROWS)
    l T
30630 Bil.J,K)=A[I.J,K)*X 30640 NEXT I
    30650 NEXT J
    30660 NEXT K
    30670 RETURN
    Multiplies each element in MATRIX A by X and constructs matrix B
    Transposition oi" a Matrix (2 Dimensional)
    30700 FOR - TO Nl
    I 1
    30710 FOR J-1 TO N2
    30720 B(J.I)-A(I.J)
    30730 NEXT J
    30740 NEXT I
30750 RETURN Transposes matrix A into matrix B

Matrix Addition (3 Dimensional)
    30800 FOR K'1 TO N3
    30310 FORJ- ITON2
    30320 FOR 1=1 TO Nl
    30330 cii.j.ki- a|i,j.k]*b;i.j.k)
    303JO NEXT f
    30830 NEXT J
    30850 NEXT K
    30870 RETURN
Array Element-wise Multiplication (3 Dimensional)
    30900 FOR K- TO N3 1
    30910 FOR J=l TO N2



                                  Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 45
       30920 FOR l-I TO N1
       30930 C[l,J,Kl-A[I.J,K)*B[I.J.K)
       30940 NEXT I
       30990 NEXT J
       30960 NEXT K
       Multiplies each element in A times its corresponding element in E
Matrix Multiplication (2 Dimensional)
       40000 FOR = TO N1
       1 1
400IO FOR J = TO N2 1

40020 C(I,J) = 40030 FORK=ITON3 40040 C{I.J)-C(1,J) + AU.K)*B|K.I) 40050 NEXTK 40060 NEXT J
40070 NEXT I

A must be an Nl by N3 matrix; B must be an N3 by N2 matrix. The resultant matrix C will be an Nl by
N2 matrix. A, B, and C must be dimensioned accordingly.

6/f.




                                 Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 46
7 / Arithmetic Functions

LEVEL II BASIC offers a wide variety of intrinsic ("built-in") functions for performing arithmetic and
special operations. The special-operation functions are described in the next chapter.

All the common math functions described in this chapter return single-precision values accurate to six
decimal places. ABS, FIX and INT return values whose precision depends on the precision of the
argument. The conversion functions (C1NT, CDBL, etc.) return values whose precision depends oil
the particular function. For all the functions, the argument niust.be enclosed in parentheses. The
argu- ment may be either a numeric variable, expression or constant. Functions described in this
chapter:

ABS COS INT SGN ATN CSNG LOO SIN CDBL EXP RANDOM SOR CI NT FIX UNO TAN

ABS (x) Returns the absolute value of the argument. ABS(X) a X for X greater than or equal to zero,
and ABS(X)=-X for X less than zero.

100 if abs(x)<ie-6 print "too small"

ATN(jc) Returns the arctangent (in radians) of the argument; that is, ATN(X) returns "the angle whose
tangent is X". To get arctangent in degrees, multiply ATN(X) by 57.29578.

tOO Y-ATN(B/C)

CDBL (x) Returns a double-precision representation of the argument. The value returned will contain'
17 digits, but only the digits contained in the argument will be significant.

CDBL may be useful when you want to force an operation to be done in double-precision, even
though the operands are single precision or even integers. For example CDBL (I7c)/J7c will return a
fraction with 17 digits of precision.
      100 FOR l%-1 TO 25 PRINT t/CDBL(1%), NEXT
      : :
*-'"-' ' '-' -' ''' !'- L'.J.B".'".!.L !"..'< j - .

CINT (jt) Returns theiargest integer not greater than the-argument. For - example, CINT (1.5) returns
1;CINT(-I.5) returns -2. For the CINT function, the argument must be in the range -32768 to + 32767.

CINT might be used to speed up an operation involving single or double-precision operands without
losing the precision of the operands (assuming you're only interested in an integer result).

100 K*-CINT(X#)*CtNT(Y#)

COS (x) Returns the cosine of the argument (argument must be in radians). To obtain the cosine of X
when X is in degrees, use COS(X*. 0174533). 100 Y-COS(X+3.3)

CSNG (x) Returns a single-precision representation of the argument. When the argument is a
double-precision value, it is returned as six significant digits with *'4/5 rounding" in the least significant
digit. So CSNG(. 6666666666666667) is returned as .666667; CSNG(.3333333333333333) is
returned as .333333.



                                                 Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 47
    100 PRINT CSNG{A#+B#)
EXP (jc) Returns the "natural exponential" of X, that is, e A inverse of the LOG function, so
X=EXP(LOG(X)).

tOO PRINT EXP[-X)

FIX (x) Returns a truncated representation of the argument. AH digits to the right of the decimal point
are simply chopped off, so the resultant value is an integer. For non-negative X, FIX(X)=iNT(X). For
negative values of X, FIX(X)=INT(X)+1. For example, F1X(2.2) returns 2, and FIX(-2.2) returns -2.

100 Y-ABS(A-FIX(A))

This statement gives Y the value of the fractional portion of A.

Page Was Blank When Provided

INT(*) Returns an integer representation of the argurhent, using the largest integer that is not grater
than the argument. Argument is not limited to the range -32765 to +32767. INT(2.5) returns 2:
INT(-2.5) returns -3; and [NT( 1000101.23) returns 100101.

100 Z=INT{A*I00+. 3)/100

Gives Z the value of A rounded to two decimal places (for non- negative A).

LOG(*) Returns the natural logarithm of the argument, that is, log {argument\ This is the inverse of the
EX? function, so s X=LOG(EXP (X)). To find the logarithm of a number to another base b, use the
formula log b (X) = Iog e (X)/log e (b). For example, LOG(32767)/LOG{2) returns the logarithm to
base 2 of 32767.
    100 PRINT LOG(3.3*X)
RANDOM RANDOM is actually a complete statement rather than a function. It reseedsthe random
number generator. IT a program uses the RND function, you may want to put RANDOM at the
beginning of the

program. This will ensure that you get an unpredictable sequence of pseudo-random numbers each
time you turn on the Computer, load the program, and run it. 10 RANDOM 20 C-RNP(6) + RND(6)
    80 GOTO 20 'RANDOM NEEDS TO EXECUTE JUST ONCE
    RND(jt)
    Generates a pseudo-random number using the current pseudo-random
    "seed number" ("generated internally and not accessible to user).
    RND may be used to produce random numbers between and 1, or
    random integers greater than 0, depending on the argument.
RND(O) returns a single-precision value between and 1. RSDdnteger) returns an integer between 1
and Integer inclusive (integer must be positive and less than 32768). For example. RND(55) returns a
pseudo-random integer greater than zero and less than 56. RND(55.5) returns a number in the same
range, because RND uses the INTeger value of the argument.

100 X-RND(2) : ON X GOTO 200,300

SGN(.t) The "«^n" lunation : returns -1 for X negative. for X zero, ar.d + 1 for X positive.



                                   Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 48
      100 ON SGN(X) + 2 GOTO 200,300,400
SENU) Returns the sine of the argument (argument must be in radians). To obtain the sine of X when
X is in degrees, use SIN(X*.0I 74533). 100 PRINT S1N(A*B-S)

SQRtt) Returns the square root of the argument. SQR(X) is the Xi(l/2), only faster.

100 Y-SQR(X4 2-H^ 2)

TAN(.t) Returns the tangent of the argument (argument must be in radians). To obtain the tangent of
X when X is in degrees, use TAN(X\0 174533). 100 Z-TAN(2*A)
      NOTE: A great many other functions may be created using the abov, functions. See Appendix F, "'Derived
      Functions".

"*» 8/SpeciaI Features LEVEL II BASIC offers some unusual functions and operations that deserve
special highlighting. Some may seem highly specialized; as you learn more about programming and
begin to experiment with machine- language routines, they will take on more significance. Other
functions in the chapter are of obvious benefit and will be used often (for example, the graphics
functions). And then there are a couple of features, INP and OUT, that will be used primarily with the
TRS-80 Expansion Interface.

Functions, statements and operators described in this chapter:

Error-Routine Other Functions Graphics: Functions: and Statements:

SET ERL INP RESET ERR MEM CLS PEEK POINT Logical Operators: POKE POS AND OUT OR
USR NOT VARPTR SKT(x,y) Turns on the graphics block at the location specified by the coordinates
x and y. For graphics purposes, the Display is divided up into a 1 28 (horizontal) by 48 (vertical) grid.
The .^-coordinates are numbered from left to right, to 1 27. The ^-coordinates are numbered from top
to bottom, to 47. Therefore the point at (0,0) is in the extreme upper left of the Display, while the point
at (127,47) is in the extreme lower right corner. See the Video Display Worksheet in Appendix E.

The arguments x and y may be numeric constants, variables or expressions. They need not be
integer values, because SET(.v,_y) uses the INTeger portion of-x: andy. SET (x,y) is valid tor:

0< =x < 128 0< my <48 Examples: 100 SET(RND(128)-1,RND(48)-1) Lights up a random point on the
Display.
      100 INPUT X.Y: SET(X,Y)
      RUN to see where the blocks are.
      C :
      .
      '
      "
_...:.. .-" : .: : ._—zzz ' - ' " " '

S/l

ZHJ RESET(x,y) Turrri off a graphics block at the location specified by the coor- dinates x and y. This
function has the same limits and parameter as SEI(x.y).




                                        Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 49
ZOO RESET (X.3)

CLS "Clear- Screen" - turns off all the graphics blocks on the Display and moves the cursor to the
upper left corner. This wipes out alpha- numeric characters as well as graphics blocks. CLS is very
useful whenever you want to present an attractive Display output.
    5 CLS
    10 SET(RND{128)-1.RND(48)-I)
    20 GOTO 10
POINTS) Tests whether the specified graphics block is "on" or "off". If the block is "on" (that is, if it has
been SET), then POINT returns a binary True (-1 in LEVEL II BASIC). If the block is "off, POINT
returns a binary False (0 in LEVEL II BASIC). Typically, the POINT test is put inside an IF-THEN
statement. 100 SET150.28} : IF POINT|50.28) THEN PRINT "ON" ELSE PRINT "OFF"

This line will always print the message, "ON", because POINT(50,28) will return a binary True, so that
execution proceeds to the THEN clause. If the test failed, POINT would return a binary False, causing
execution to jump to the ELSE statement.

ERL Returns the line number in which an error has occurred. This function is primarilyused inside an
error-handling routine accessed by an ON ERROR GOTO statement. If no error h;!S occurred when
ERL is called, line number is returned. However, if an error has occurred since power-up, ERL returns
the line number in which the error occurred. If error occurred in direct mode, 65535 is returned
(largest number representable in two bytes).

Example Program using ERL 5 ON ERROR GOTO 1000 10 CLEAR 10 20 IN?UT"ENTER YOUR
MESSAGE";MS 30 INPUT'NOW ENTER A NUM3ER";N N=l/ :
    40 REM REST OF PROGRAM BEGINS HERE
    1000 IF ERL-20 THEN 1010 ELSE IF ERL = 30THEN 1020
    1003 ON ERROR GOTO
    1010 PRINT "TRY AGA1N-KEEP MESSAGE UNDER 11 CHARACTERS"
    1013 RESUME 20
    1020 PRINT'TORGOT TO MENTION: NUMBER MUST NOT BE ZERO"
    1025 RESUME 30
RUN Che program. Try entering a long message; try entering zero when the program asks for a
number. Note that ERL is used in lint 1000 to determine where the error occurred so that appropriate
action may be taken.

ERR/2+1 Similar to ERL, except ERR returns a value related to the code of the error rather than the
line in which the error occurred. Commonly used inside an error handling routine accessed by an ON
ERROR GOTO statement. Sire Appendix B, "Error Codes."

ERR/2+1 = true error code (true error code -1)*2=ERR Example Program 10 ON ERROR GOTO
1000 20 DIM A[15) : 1 = 1
    30 READ A( 1 )
40 1= 1+1 GOTO 30 :




                                   Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 50
    50 REM REST OF PROGRAM
    100 DATA 2,3,3,7,1,13
    999 END
    1000 IF ERR/2 + =4 RESUME 50
    1
    1010 ON ERROR GOTO
    Note line 1 000: 4 is the error code for Out of Data.
INP(port) Returns a byte-value t'rom the specified port. The TRS-80 Expansion Interface is
requtretf'to use INP effectively (with user-supplied peripheral hardware). There are 256 ports,
numbered 0-255. For example
    100 PRINT INP(SO)
    inputs a byte from port 50 and prints the decimal value of the byte.
MEM Returns the number of unused and unprotected bytes in memory. This function may be used in
the Command Mode to see how much space a resident program takes up; or it may be used inside
the program to avert OM (Out of Memory) errors by allocating less string space, DIMensioning
smaller array sizes, etc. MEM requires no argument.

Example:
    100 IF MEM < BO THEN 900
    110 DIM A|t5)
Enter the command PRINT MEM (in Command Mode) to find out the amount of memory not being
used to store programs, variables, strings, stack, or reserved for object-files.

OUT port, value Ouputs a byte value to the specified port. OUT is not a function but a statement
complete in itself. It requires two arguments separated by a comma (no parenthesis): the port
destination and the byte value to be sent. Example: OUT 290.10 sends the value "10" to port 250.
Both arguments are limited to the range 0-255.

OUT, like INP, becomes useful when you add the TRS-80 Expansion Interface. See INP.

PEZK(uddrt'ss) Returns the value stored .it the specified byte address (in decimal M form). To J--.-
this :'v : ;o:\ % '""fa - .ed - refer to two -actions of the Appendix: the Merr.ory Map is.i vou'll krovv
where to PEEK) and the Table of Fui-.ction. ASCII and Graphics Codes (so you'H know what the v
il-.i.-s represent).

If you're using PEEiK to examine object files, you'll also need a microprocessor instruction set manual
(ore is included with the TRS-80 Editor/Assembler Instruction Manual).

PEEK is valuable for hnkin:- machine language routines with LEVEL II BASIC programs. The
machine language routine can store informa-

tion in a certain memory location, and PEEK may be used inside your BASIC program to retrieve the
information. For example,

A - PEEK (17999) returns the value stored at location 17999 3nd assigns that value to the variable A.




                                  Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 51
Peek may also be used to retrieve information stored with a POKE statement. L'sin? PEEK and
POKE allows you to set up very compact, byte-oriented storage systems. Refer to the Memory Map in
the Appendix to determine the appropriate locations for this type of storage. See POKE, L'SR.

POXE address, value Loads a value into a specified memory location. POKE is not a function hut a
state m.-nt complete in itself. It requires two arguments: a byte address.- .:..::-. form) and a\.ih.i-. fhe
value must be .|

between and 255 inclusive. Refer to the Mcniorv Map in the Appendix to see which address you'd like
to POKE.

To POKE (or PEEKl an address ab-ne 32767. use the following formula: -1 *ide,ired address - 3"<i71
= POKE or PEEK address,

POKE is useful for LEVEL II graphics. Look at the Video Display Worksheet in the A;-p.r.d:x. In each
of the 102-1 PRINT locations here are 6 syhJivivns. If we call each PRINT position a byte, then the
smaller boxes are 'nits. We know that ill ere are S bits per byte; so what hap-vned to the other 2.' One
is used to identify the byte as a graphic or ASCII cede. The other bit is not used. The remaining 6 bus
contain either an ASCII, graphics or control code.

w

We cjn use POKE to turn on the entire PRINT position (6 bits) at one time. When we use SET, only hit
is lurncd on. Therefore POKE I

is about 6 times faster tinn SET. The fallowing program demon*- strates this speed.
    10 CLS
    20 FOR X-I5360 TO 16333
    30 POKE X. 191
    40 NEXT
    50 GOTO 50
    RUN the program to see how fast the screen is "painted" white.
    (191 is the code for "jII bits on". 15360 to 1 63 S3 are the Video
    Display memory addresses.)
Since POKE can he used to store information anywhere in memory, very important when we Jo our
graphics to stay in the range it is

for display locations. If we POKE outside this range, we may store the byte in a critical place. We
could be POKEing into our pro- gram, or even in worse places like the stack. Indiscriminate POKEing
can be disastrous. You might have to reset or power off and start over again. Unless you know where
you are POKEing— don't.

See PEEK, USR, SET, and Chapter 4, CHRS for background material.

POSM Returns a number from to 63 indicating the current cursor position on the Display. Requires a
"dummy argument" (any numeric expression).
    100 PRINT TAB(dO| POS(O)
    prints 40 at position 40. (Note that a blank is inserted before the



                                   Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 52
    "4" to accommodate th sign; therefore the "4" is actually at position
    41.) Th; "0" in "POS(0 '
    is the dummy argument.
    100 PRINT "THESE" TAB(POS[0)*5) "WORDS" TAB(POS(0)*5 "ARE" J
    110 PRINT TAB(POS(0)*5) ••EVENLY" TAB(POS(0] + 3) "SPACED"
THESE READY >_

Ajm.iM.Tj USR (x) Calls a machine language subroutine and passes the argument to the subroutine
(you may not need it, in which case it is a dummy argument). Such a subroutine could be loaded from
tape, or created by POKEing microprocessor instructions into the appropriate memory locations. To
use the USR function, you should be familiar with the machine-language programming (as explained
in the TRS-80 Editor/ Assembler Instruction Manual or any Z-80 Programming Manual). Playing
around with the USR function can be disastrous to any programs you may have resident in the
TRS-80; so do some studying before you attempt to use it.

There is only one allowable USR call in LEVEL II BASIC. In LEVEL II DISC BASIC, there will be up to
10: USRO through USR9.

Example: 100 X-USR(N}

would cause the Computer to branch to the routine beginning at the location POKEd into the USR(N)
addresses 16526-16527. n is also stored at2687_as a 2-byte integer. Upon return from the routine,
the variable X would be given the value passed back from the routine. If no value is passed, X is
assigned the value of the argument N.

N must be an integer between -32768 and 32767. To create a machine language subroutine for
access by USR, you must protect an area in high memory. (See Appendix D, "Memory Map"). First
determine how many bytes your routine will require Then subtract that number from your Computer's
highest Memory address (depending on whether your TRS-80 has 4K or 6K bytes 1

of memory). The resultant number will be the address where your protected memory should begin.
Turn on the TRS-80, and answer the MEMORY SIZE question by entering the address where
protected memory should begin. Addresses above that number will now be reserved for machine
language data and routines.

Load the machine language routine, using POKE or via the cassette interface using the SYSTEM
command (see Chapter 2, SYSTEM). Then, at the point where you want your BASIC program to
branch to the machine language routine, insert a statement which calls USR(O). For example.
    50 PRINT USR(N)
50 A - USR(I%) + B

To pass the argument to the subroutine, the subroutine should immediately execute a CALL
0A7F(hex) i.e., call 2687(dec).

SSaSE3D -'•'•'"••fFq

There are two ways to return to your BASIC program from the. machine-language subroutine: 1) -if
you don't wi.sh to pass any vjlues from rir= snl'routine back to the BASIC program, a
machine-lar.;::.:.;;: RET instruction can be used.


                                Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 53
2) To return a value, load the value into the HL r.-e-.ster pair as a two-byte signed integer and
execute a JUMP to location OAyAlHEX) [2714 (DECll- HL will be returned as a signed 2-byte integer.

The last thing you need to do is tell your BASIC prolan what address to branch to in the machine
language routine. This two-byte address must be POKEd into memory locations 16526 and 16527.
POKE the least significant byte into the lower ( 165261 memory location.

For example, if your routine begins at 32000: in hexadecimal thisis7D00. Therefore we POKE 00
(HEX) into 16526, and 7D (HEX) into 16527, Since POKE requires arguments in decimal form, we
use:

POKE 16526.0 POKE ; 16527.208

(208 decimal = 7D hex).

After you have executed the above line, when you use the USR(O) function, the Computer will branch
to the instruction stored at 32000. Note: locations 16526-16527 contain the address of the Illegal
Function Call routine unless modified by POKE.

USR routines are automatically allocated up to 8 stack levels or 16 bytes (a high and low memory
byte for each stack level). If you need more stack space, you can save the BASIC stack pointer and
set up your own stack. However, this gets complicated; be sure you know what you're doing. See
Chapter 2, SYSTEM, and this chapter, PEEK, POKE.

VARPTR (variable name) Returns an address-value which will help you locate where the variable
name and its value are stored in memory. If the variable you specify hj not been assigned a value, an
FC error will occur when this function is called.

If VARPTRWiirwr variable) returns address K: Address K contains the least significant byte l LSB) of
2-byte integer K (two's complement form). Address K+l contains the most significant byte (MSB) of
integer K.

If VARPTRfsm^te precision variable) returns address K: (K)* = LSB of value (K+l) » Next most sig.
byte (Next MSB) (K+2) = MSB (K+3) = exponent of value

If VARPTR(double precision variable) returns K: (K) = LSB of value (K+I) = Next MSB (K+...) = Next
MSB (K+6) " MSB (K+7) = exponent of value

IF VARPTR(sm'«s variable) returns K: (K) = length of string (K+l) = LSB of string value starting
address (K+2) = MSB of string value starting address

For single and double precision values, the number is stored in normalized exponential form, so that a
decimal is assumed before the MSB. 28 is added to the exponent. Furthermore, the high bit I

of MSB is used as a sign bit. See examples below.

Examples: A! = 4 will be stored as follows: 4=10 Binary, normalized as .1E2 So exponent of A is
12S+2 = 130 MSB of A is 10000000; however, the high bit is changed to zero since the value is
positive. So A! is stored as Exponent MSB Next MSB LSB 130 A! = -.5 will be stored as Exponent
MSB Next MSB LSB 128 128

* (K) signifies "contents of address K"




                                  Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 54
A! = 7 will be stored j* Exponent MSB Next MSB LSB 131 96 A! = -7: Exponent MSB Next MSB LSB
131 224

Zero is simply stored as a zero-exponent. The other bytes are insignificant.

Logical Operators In Chapter 1 we described how AND, OR and NOT can be used with relational
expressions. For example,
       100 IF A-C AND NOT |B>40) THEN 60 ELSE 50
AND, OR and NOT can also be used for bit manipulation, bitwise comparisons, and Boolean
operations. In this section, we will explain how such operations can be implemented using LEVEL II
BASIC. However, we will not try to explain Boolean algebra, decimai-to-binary conversions, binary
arithmetic, etc. If you need to leam about these subjects, Radio Shack's Understanding Digital
Computers (Catalog Number 62-2027) would be a good place to start.

AND, OR and NOT convert their arguments to six teen-bit, signed two's-complement integers in the
range -32768 to +32767. They then perform the specified logical operation on them and return a
result within the same range. If the arguments are not in this range, an "FC" error results.

The operations are performed in bitwise fashion; this means that each bit of the result is obtained by
examining the bit in the same position for each argument.

The following truth tables show the logical relationship between bits:

OPERATOR ARGUMENT 1 ARGUMENT 2 AND 1 1

OPERATOR ARGUMENT 1 ARGUMENT 2 OR 1 1

ri 1

Bag 8/10

OPERATOR ARGUMENT RESULT NOT I

EXAMPLES: (Tn all or" ire exam pies i-elo v, leading zeroes on binary numbers are not shown.)

63 AND 16=16 Sinee 63 equals binary and 16 equals binarv I 1 1 1 1 1

100C0. tile result of the AND is binary 10000 or 16.

15 AND 14-14 15 equals binary 1111. and 14 equals binary 1110, so 15 and 14equals binary 1110 or
14.

-1 AND 8=8 -1 equals binary 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 and 8 equals binary 1000. so the result is
binary 1000 or 8 decimal.

4 AND 2=0 4 equals binary 100 and 2 equals binary 10, so the result is binary because none of the
bits in either argument match to give a bit in the result. 1

4 OR 2=6 Binary 100 OR'd with binary 10 equals binary I 10, or 6 decimal.

10 OR 10=10 Biliary 1010 OR'd with binary 1010 equals binary 1010. or 10 decimal.

-1 OR -2=-l Binarv 1 1 I 1 1 1 1 I 1 1 1 1 1 1 I 1 (-1) OR'd with binary 1111! Ill 1 1 111 I 10 (-2) equals
binary 1 111 II 11111111 ll.or-1.




                                   Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 55
NOT0=-l The bit complement of binary to 16 places is six- teen ores I II I II 111 llllll I Dor -I. Also NOT
-1=0.

NOTX NOT X is equal to -( X>] ). This is be.ause [o form tile .ist.'.'n ''I! r.vo's complement of [he
number,

you :..:s.- tile "I! (one's) complement .i:id add one.

NOT l=-2 [lie .'i;;::i bit complement of 1 is

111', II I I 1 I 111 I iO. which :

. equal to -( 1*11 or

Atypical use of Hub-twist -per nors is to test bits set in Ihe TRS-SO's inport ports which reflect tile
state of some external device. This requires Ihe TRS-SO Exp.m.ion Interface.

S/ll

Bit position 7 is tl'.e most significant bit o!" a byU\ while position is

the least significant.

For instance, suppose bit of i port 5 is I v.iv.Ti the door to R.?o:ti

X is closed, and if the door is open. The following program will 1

print "Intruder Alert" if the door is opened:
       10 IF INP(5)AND 2 THEN PRINT "INTRUDER ALERT". GO TO 1G0
       20 GOTO 10
See Chapter 1 , "Logical Operators".

9/Ediiing LEVEL I users undoubtedly spent lots of time retyping. long prcgr-im lines, .ili because of a
typo, or maybe just to make j minor change. Once a line had been entered, there was no way to alter
the line - without starting all over and retyping it.

LEVEL IPs editing features eliminate much of this extra work. In fact, it's so easy to alter program
lines, you'll probably be able to do much more experiment- ing with multi-statement lines, complex
expressions,

Commands, subcommands, and special function keys described i

this chapter:

EDIT L fiD USUI] * nc »Space-Bar l " 5C B .. a nice SHIFT i E

EDIT line number This command puts you in the Edit Mode. You must specify which line you wish to
edit, in one of two ways:

EDIT line-numher BSH3 Lets you edit the specified line. If line number is not in use, or an FC error
occurs

edit. Lets you edit the current pro- gram line -- last line entered or altered or in which an error has
occurred. For example, type in and H^.ij-J the following line:
       100 FOR I - 1 TO 10 STEP. 3 : PRINT l.l|2. U 3 : NEXT



                                     Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 56
      This line will be used in exercising all the Edit subcommands de-
      scribed below.
Now type EDIT, and hit GSE3 The Computer will display:

'Vi

You are row in the Edit Mode and may begin editing line ICO.

ENTER key Hitting HZHU while in the Edit Mod.- cau-.e, the Computer to record all the changes
you've made r.i ;»ny) in the current line, and returns you to- the Command Mcde.

jzSpace-bar In the Edit Mode, hitting the Space-bar moves the cursor over one space to the right and
displays any character stored in the preceding position. For example, using line DO entered above,
put the I

Computer in the Edit Mode so the Display shows:

Now hit the Space-Bar. The cursor will move over one space, and the first character oi ;he program
line will be displayed. If this character was a blank, then a blank will be displayed. Hit the Space- Bar
until you reach the first non-blank character:

100 F_

is displayed. To move over more than one space at a time, hit the desired number of spaces first, and
then hit the space-bar. For example, enter 5 and hit Space-bar, and the dupljy will siiow some- thing
like this (may vary depending on how many blanks you inserted in the line):
      100 FOR l=_
      Now type 8 and hit the Space-bar. The cursor will move over
      8 spaces to the right, and 8 more characters will be displayed.
n -"-(Backspace) Moves the cursor to the left by r. v ices. If r.o :r.;:v.her n s >pe.:!;ed, the cursor
moves back !:._ space. W hen the c.irt.ir :v\)\-..-s to the left, allcharacters in its "pain" are erased from
the Jiip'.jj but they are ,

not deleted from the program line. For example, a-samir.g yjii'v.- used nSpace-Bar so that the Display
shows:
      100 FOR 1^1 TO 10 _
      type 8 and hit the -• key. The Display will show something like this:
      100 FOR l-_ (will vary depending on number of blanks m
      your line 100 )
ff'iyi . . m.j..-„^i... -. ; -.—* •>-!•• -i "g'L'.j jl.

SHIFT i Hitting SHIFT and I keys together effects an escape from any of the Insert subcommands
listed below: X, I and H. After escaping from an Insert 'subcommand, you'll still be in the Edit Mode,
and the cursor will remain in its current position. (Hitting EZH33 is another way to exit these Insert
subcommands).

L (List Line) When the Computer is in the Edit Mode, and is not currently executing one of the
subcommands below, hitting L causes the remainder of the program line to be displayed. The cursor




                                             Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 57
drops down to the next line Of the Display, reprints the current line number, and moves to the first
position of the line. Tor example, when the Display shows too _ hit L (without hitting BEH33 kcy * and
Une 10° wil1 be displayed; IOO FOR I- 1 TO 10 STEP .9 : PRINT), I « 1, l|) i NEXT 100 _

This lets you look at the line in its current form while you're doing the editing.

X (End of Line and Insert) Causes the rest of the current line to be displayed, moves cursor to end of
line, and puts Computer in the Insert subcommand mode so you can add material to the end of the
line. For example, using line 100, when the Display shows

hitX (without hitting E35S3 ) and the entire line will be dis- played; notice that the cursor now follows
the last character on the line:
    100 FOR 1-1 TO 10 STEP .5 PRINT : I, lit, lil : NEXT-
We can now add another statement to the line, or delete material from the line by using the -» key.
For example, type : print-done" at the end of the line. Now hit I77iH:1 . If you now type LIST 100, the
Display should show something like this:
    100 FOR 1*1 TO 10 STEP .5 PRINT : I, 1*2, I 43 : NEXT : PRINT"DONE"
s-ana-g a . ?. >..

aa a sa am a 9/3

I (Insert) Allows you-to insert mjterial beginning at the current cursor position on the line. (Hitting -*will
actually d elete m aterial from the line in this mode.) For example, type and Nvi J^Tl thg EDIT 100
command, then use the Space Bar to move over to the decimal point in line 100. The Display will
show: 100 FOR 1-1 TO 10 STEP ._ Suppose you w ant to ch ange the increment from .5to .25. Hit
the I key (don't hit H M<3;| ) and the Computer will now lei you insert t

materia! at the current position. Now hit 2 so the Display shows:
    100 FOR l-I TO 10 STEP .2_
    You've made the necessary change, so hit SHIFT i to escape from
    the Insert Subcommand. Now hit L key to display remainder of line
    and move cursor back to the beginning of the line:
    100 FOR t-1 TO 10 STEP .23 : PRINT I. 1*2. I i3 : NEXT PRINT "DONE"
    :
100 _

You can also exit the Insert subcommand and save all changes by hitting HEH33 This W 'U return
you to Command mode.

A (Cancel and Restart) Moves the cursor back to the beginning of the program line and cancels
editing changes already made. For example, if you have added, deleted, or changed something in a
line, and you wish ro go back to the beginning of the line and cancel the changes already made: first
hit SHIFT 4 (to escape from any subcommand you may be executing); then hit A. (The cursor will
drop down to the next line, display the line number and move to the first program character.

£ (Save Changes and Exit) Causes Computer to end editing and save all changes made. You must
be in Edit Mode, not executing any subcommand, when you hit E to end editing.



                                    Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 58
Q (Cancel and Exit) Tells Computer to end editing and cancel all changes maJj in the current editing
session. If you've decided not to change the iine, type Q to cancel changes and leave Edit Mode.

Ecssa

H (Hack and Insert) Tells Computer to delete remainder of line and lets you insert material at the
current cursor position. Hitting -*will actually delete a character from the line in this mode. For
example, using line 100 listed above, enter the Edit Mode and space over to the last state- ment,
PRINT" DONE". Suppose you wish to delete this statement and insert an END statement. Display will
show: 100 FOR I- 1 TO tO STEP. 25 PRINT : I. 1*2. 14 3 : NEXT :_ Now type H and then type END.
Hit H'Wdil key. List the line:
     100 FOR l-I TO 10: STEP .25- PRINT !. 1*2, 1*3 : NEXT END
     :
should be displayed.

nl> (Delete) Tells Computer to delete the specified number n characters to the right of the cursor. The
deleted characters will be enclosed in exclamation marks to show you which characters were
affected. For example, using line 100, space over to the PRINT command statement:
     100 FOR 1-1 TO 10 STEP .25 _
     : :
Now type 19D. This tells the Computer to delete 1 9 characters to the right of the cursor. The Display
should show something like this:
     100 FOR 1-1 TO 10 STEP. 25
     ; : IPRENT I, I 4 2, 1*3 :l_
When you list the complete line, you'll see that the PRINT statement has been deleted.

«C (Change) Tells the Computer to let you change the specified number of charac- ters beginning at
the current cursor position. If you type C without a preceding number, the Computer assumes you
want to change one character. When you have entered n number of characters, the Computer returns
you to the Edit Mode (so you're not in the «C Subcommand). For example, using line 100, suppose
you want to change the final value of the FOR-NEXT loop, from "10" to "15". In the Edit Mode, space
over to just before the "0" in "10".
     100 FOR 1*1 TO i_
     Now type C. Computer will assume you want to change just one
     character. Type 5, then hit L. When you list the line, you'll see that
     the change has been made.
     100 FOR 1*1 TO 15 STEP .25 NEXT END
     ; :
would be the current line if you've followed the editing sequence in this chapter. '-' " OBS '-• -'- -' •"'•
-J--

BE




                                   Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 59
nSc (Search) Tells the Computer to search for the nth occurrence of the character c, and move the
cursor to that position. If you don't specify a value for n, the Computer will search for the first
occurrence of the speci- fied character. If character c is not found, cursor goes to the end of the line.
Note: The Computer only searches through characters to the right of the cursor.

For example, using the current form of line 100, type EDIT 100 ( EZH33 ) and then hit 2S: This tells
the Computer to search .

for the second occurrence of the colon character. Display should show:
     100 FOR l-l TO 15 STEP .23 : NEXT-
     You may now execute one of the subcommands beginning at the
     current cursor position. For exampie, suppose you want to add the
     counter variable after the NEXT statement. Type I to enter the
     Insert subcommand, then type the variable name, I. That's all you
     want to insert, so hit SHIFT to escape from the Insert subcom-
     mand. The next time you list the line, it should appear as:
     100 FOR 1-1 TO 15 STEP .23 : NEXT 1: END
nKc (Search and "Kill") Tells the Computer to delete all characters up to the nth occurrence of
character c, and move the cursor to that position. For example, using the current version of line CO,
suppose we want t o delete the 1

entire line up to the END statement. Type EDIT 100 ( ('fjTffiil ), and then type 2K: .This tells the
Computer to delete all characters up to the 2nd occurrence of the colon. Display should show: 100
IFOR 1-1 TO 15 STEP .25 : NEXT H_ The second colon still needs to be deleted, so type D . The
Display will now show:
     100 IFOR 1-1 TO 15 STEP .25 : NEXT lll:l_
     Now hit QCHUl ar>d yp e LIST
     l i °° ( BSX33 )
Line 100 should look something like this:
     100 END
»t.^.:.«. :-.:.. • : . - . - i. -•. '. — i.»..'i-rra




                                             Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 60
10 / Expansion Interface

An Expansion Interface is available for the TRS-80 LEVEL II Computer. This interface will allow the
use of additional Input/Output devices. There is also a provision for adding RAM memory. The
Interface will allow four major additions to the TRS-80: 1. An additional cassette deck 2. A TRS-80
Line Printer 3. Up to four Mini-Disks 4. Up to 48K bytes of RAM Memory (32K in the Expansion
Interface)

These devices are available from your Radio Shack store or dealer. To set up the Expansion
Interface and any of the external devices, see the Expansion Interface instructions.

When the Expansion Interface is hooked up to the TRS-80, the Com- puter assumes that a Mini-Disk
is interfaced. The Mini Disk will allow the use of additional commands and statements listed later.
Even if you don't have a Mini Disk, the Computer will assume you do (because of the p-resen.e* of
the Disk Controller) and will try to input special instructions from the Disk Controller. Therefore, to use
the Interface without a Mini Disk, hold down the BREAK key as you turn on the TRS-80. This will
override the mini-disk mode and allow normal LEVEL II operation. Whenever you need to press the
Reset button, you must also hold down the BREAK key.

Dual Cassettes The use of two cassettes will allow a much more efficient and convenient manner of
updating data stored on tape. For example, if you have payroll data stored on tape, the information
can be read in one item at a time from cassette * 1 then changed or added and written out on
cassette #2, one item at a time. The routine might look like this:
    10 INPUT #-1 .A.B.C.D
    20 PRINT "MAKE CORRECTIONS HERE: RETYPE LINE"
    30 INPUT A.B.C.D
    40 PRINT "THE LIME NOW READS:" A.B.C.D
    SO PRINT "STORING ON TAPE #2..."
    60 PRINT •-!, A.B.C.D
    70 GOTO 10
    This is a very simple application; however, very powerful routines
    can be constructed to allow Input and output of data using two tapes
    simultaneously.
ggSSSSBS --• } SEC 10/1

See Chapter 3, PRINT.

Codes Several codas are used to control the output of the line printer. The codes and their functions
are listed below. The CHRS function is used to call up these function codes. For example:

PRINT CHRS (10) will generate a line feed.

CODE FUNCTION 10 line feed with carriage return 1 line feed with carriage return 1 Move carriage to
top of form (page) 1 carriage return



                                   Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 61
     NOTE: At the end of a line, a line feed is automatically generated unless a semi-colon is used at the end of
     the PRINT statement.

The line printer will print 6 lines per inch and 66 lines per page. If this format is not suitable, the
number of lines per page can be changed by POKEing the new number of lines into memory location
16424.

Example: POKE 16424. 40 This instructs the Line Printer to print 40 lines per page.

Mini-Disks - (LEVEL II DISK BASIC)

The TRS-80 Mini Disk System is a small version of a floppy disk. The disk allows vast file storage
space and rrluch quicker access time than you get with tape storage. Disc will contain about 80,000
bytes of free space for files. Each additional disk will have 89,600 bytes of file space. The disk system
has its own =et of commands which allow manipulations of files and expanded abilities in file use. The
TRS-80 Mini Disk System allows both sequential and random access. The disks will also allow use of
several additional BASIC commands and functions:

Commands: CLOSE LSET PUT FIELD NAME RSET GET OPEN MERGE KILL PRINT LOAD SAVE

I/O Functions CVD LOF CVI MKD5 CVS MKI$ EOF MKSS LOC OSKF

Additions to LEVEL II Ten USR calls - USR0 through INSTR (performs function of USR9 INSTRING
subroutine *H (hex constants) - see Chapter 4) &o (octal constants) times (Date and 24-Hr. DEFUSR
Real-Time Clock.)

line input DEF FN * L,ser Defined Functions)

M DS (on left side of equation) I

For explanation of these commandj functions, see the TRS-80 Disk Operating System Manual.

Expansion of RAM Memory The TRS-80 Expansion Interface has provisions for adding extra RAM
memory. This is done by adding RAM memory chips. You can add up to 32,768 additional bytes of
memory. For price information and installation, see your Radio Shack store or dealer.




                                    Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 62
11 / Saving Time and Space

Most LEVEL II programs are taster and lake up less memory space than their LEVEL I counterparts.
But even with its inherently more efficient features, LEVEL II can be further streamlined by following a
few simple guidelines when constructing your program.

Saving Memory Space 1) When your program is operating properly, delete all unnecessary REM
statements from your running version. 2) Do not use unnecessary spaces between statements,
operators, etc.

3) When possible, use multiple-statement program lines (with a colon between each two statements).
Each time you enter a new line number it costs you 5 bytes. 4) Use integer variables whenever
possible, for example, FOR 1% = 1 TO 10 Integers take only two bytes. Single precision takes 7 and
double precision takes 1 1 bytes.

5) Using subroutines will save program space if the operation is called from different places several
times. If a routine is always called from the same place, use unconditional branches (GOTO's). Each
active GOSUB takes 6 bytes: a GOTO takes none at Run time.

6) Structure your calculations so as to use as few parentheses as possible (refer to Chapter
"Arithmetic Operators"). It takes 1 ,

4 bytes to process parentheses. And since these operations inside parentheses are done first, the
result of each parenthetical expression must be stored (this takes 12 bytes).

7) Dimension arrays sparingly. When you set up a matrix, the Computer reserves 1 1 subscript
addresses for each DIMension, even not filled. Use the zero subscripted elements, since if the space
is

they are always available. 8) Use DEF statements when you will be working with values other than
single precision (strings, integers and double precision). A DEF statement takes 6 bytes but this is
made up for fairly quickly since you don't need to use type declaration characters with the variable
names.

li/i

mmzmszsETz

Speeding Up Execution

The speed at which a program is processed will defend on the com- plexity of the operations and the
number of instructions. In most simple programs, speed will not be a factor. It will seem as though the
answer h returned the moment you enter RUN. However, as you begin writing longer and more
intricate programs, speed will become a significant factor. Here are some suggestions to guide you in
designing speedier programs.

1) Delete all unnecessary lines in the program (REM statements, etc.)

2). Combine multi-statement program lines when practical. 3) Use variables rather than constants in
operations (very important). Your TRS-80 normally operates using floating decimal point values. It


                                  Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 63
takes a lot less time to access a variable than to con- vert a constant to floating point representation^
For example: if you will use * a lot in a program, define it as a variable (PI-3. 141 59) and use the
variable (PI) in the operations. 4) Use POKE graphics. This can speed up your graphics displays by a
factor of 6. 5) Define the most commonly used variables first. When a variable is defined it is located
at the top of the variable table. The second will be just below that. When variables are accessed, the
table will be searched to find the variable. Therefore, you will save time by locating frequently used
variables at the top of the table (by defining them first). The Computer will not have to look as far to
find them. 6) Use integer variables, especially in FOR-NEXT loops, when possible. This is most
important of all.

ET=

A/Level II Summary

Special Characters and Abbreviatons


Command Mode
Return carriage and interpret command

Cursor backspace and delete last character typed

SHIFT -* Cursor to beginning of logical line; erase line

Linefeed

Statement delimiter; use between statements on same logical line

Move cursor to next tab stop. Tab stops are at positions 0. S, 16, 24, 32,40. 48, and 56.

SHIFT * Convert display to 32 characters per line

CLEAR Clear Display and convert to 64 characters per line


Execute Mode
SHIFT fe Pause in execution; freeze display during LIST

BREAK Stop execution

BZSH3 Interpret data entered from Keyboard with INPUT statement

Use in place or PRINT.

Use in place of :REM

"Current line"; use in place of line number with LIST. EDIT, etc.

A/1

Type Declaration Characters

Character Type

S String as. zzs




                                  Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 64
% Integer Al'i. SUM* ! Single-Precision bi, Nit

• Double-Precision A*, l/l#

D Double-Precision (exponential notation) 1.23456789D-IZ

E Single-Precision (exponential notation) I.23456E+30


Arithmetic Operators
+ add - subtract * multiply

4 exponentiate (e.g., 2 i 3 * 8)

String Operator

+ concatenate (string together)


Relational Operators
Symbol meaning in numeric expressions in string expressions

< is less than precedes

is greater than follows

is equal to equals

< or < is less than or equal to precedes or equals

> =* or => is greater than or equal to follows or equals

<> or >< does not equal does not equal

BE A/2

Order of Operations (operators on same line have same precedence)

4 Exponentiation) f

-tNsgation)

Relation;;! op.Taton NOT AND OR

Commands Command Function Examples

AUTO mir..rin Turn on automatic auto line numbering AUTO 10 i-esiiiming witli auto 5.5 in in. using
inure- AUTO..I0 ment of tin.

CLEAR Set numeric van- CLEAR ahles to zero. strings to null.

CLEAR n S :me as CLEAR CLEAR 500 Kit also >ets ISlJc CLEAR MEM/4 ii t?> tes for > trine*.

CONT Continue after CONT BREAK or STOP in execution.

DELETE mm-nn Delete program DELETE too lines from line DELETE 10-50 mm to line tin. delete .

EDIT mm Enter Edit Mode EDIT too for line mm. See edit .




                                   Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 65
FJii Mode 5ur>- '.0!iir:ianils hclmv.

LIST mm-nn List all program LIST lines from mm to LIST 30-60 nn. LIST 30- L1ST -90 LIST .

A/i

NEW Delete entire pro- NEW gram and reset .ill

etc.

RUN mm Execute program run beginning .it io-.v.-st run 55 numbered line or mm if specified.
SYSTEM Enter Monitor See Chapter 2 Mode for loading of machine-language file from cassette.

TROFF Turn off Trace troff

TRON Turn on Trace tron

Edit Mode Subcommands and Function Keys

Subcommand/Function Key Function

ENTER End editing and return to Command Mode.

SHIFT i Escape from subcommand and remain in Edit Mode.

nSpace-Bar Move cursor n spaces to right.

n -* Move cursors spaces to left.

L List remainder of program line and return to beginning of line.

X List remainder of program line, move cursor to end of line, and start Insert subcommand.

I Insert the following sequence of characters at current cursor position; use Escape to exit this
subcommand.

A Cancel changes and return cursor to beginning of line.

E End editing, save all changes and return to Command Mode.

End editing, cancel all changes made and return to Command Mode.

E=2 A/4

~~~; **"";• ~~" ~?r!!3

H ofchai ictetv. use Escape to exil this subcommand.

nD Delete specific.) ii'i:;ikr ol" eluncters >i ;veinn!:i,i jt lu !':;;: t :u: ;or position. :

«c Cruras (or replace! the specified number ot characters /i usine the ne\t /i characters entered.

nSc Move cursor to xth occurrence (.si' character c. counting from current cursor position.

Deleft* ill dKimcteis from current cursor position up to 'ith occurrence of character c, counting from
current cursor position.

Input/Output Statements

Function Examples




                                        Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 66
Output to Display PRINT A3 the- v :! ['j--'

I'.xv riy be of a-/i. ;i print - print X'3 ,

d

e;;p-es-.. ; ,:orcon- .:ii. or j list of

Comr".i s.-rves .is j PRINT 1.2.3.4 F'isINT modifier. PRINT "l". "Z" C l :-:S Clr.o: 1.) PRINT 1,.Z

i-co -ct --.er.-.-s PRINT X ;" 'ANSWER" ! i'A '!' i'''"!i- PRINT X Y Z:

i.-- .TtS .1 .p it-." PRINT ",1N?,V:R IS":

\/5

mssEss:^.

PRINT modifier; print • 540, "CENTER" begin PRINTing at PfWNT v n*3,x*3 specified display position
nJ

Print modifier: PRINT TABlN) N moves cursor to specified Display position n (expres- sion).

PRINT USING stringiexp PRINT format PRINT USING A3;X specifier: output PRINT USING "#.#-;Y*Z
exp in form speci- fied by string field (see below).

INPUT "message'\variable Print message*(if INPUT"ENTER NAME":AS any) and await
INPUT-VALUE"; X input from Key- INPUT'ENTER NUMBERS" board. INPUT A.B.C.D* PRINT #-
Output to PRINT *— 1.A.B.C.DS Cassette #1.

INPUT #- Input from Cassette #1.

DATA item list Hold data for access oat A 22.33.1 1,1.2345 by READ state- data "hall'VSmith'V'OOE"
ment.

READ variable list Assign value(s) to READ A.A1.A2.A3 the specified vari- READ AS.BS.Cf.D
able(s), starting with current DATA element.

Reset DATA point- RESTORE er to first item in first DATA state- ment.

ajiMP.mtMftjj

A/6

Field Specifiers for PRINT USING statements

Numeric Character Example

Numeric field (one •»« digit p tT »1.

Decimal point »*. position.

Print loading or + *.• trailing sign (plus •.< for positive num- — #.i bers. minus for ».< negative
numbers).

Print trailing sign »»< only if value print- ed is negative.

Fillleading blanks ••• with asterisk.




                                           Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 67
Place dollar sign SS=* immediately to left of leading digit.

Dollars sign to left "S of leading digit and fill leading blanks

with asterisks.

**** Exponential format,' • Hit with one significant digit to left of decimal.

String Character Example

Single character. 1

String with length equal to 2 plus number of spaces between % symbols.

~— A/7

Program Statements S' atement Examples

C]'ype Definition)

DEFDBL letter list or range Define as double- defdbl j precision all DEFDBL X.Y.A variables
beginning DEFDBL A-E.J with specified letter, letters or range of Liters.

DEFINT letter list or range Define as integer defint a till va.ri.iHes b^in- defint c.e.g ning with specified
defint a-k letter, letters or range of letters.

DEFSNG letter list or range Define as single- DEFSNG L precision all vari- DEFSNG A-L, Z ables
beginning DEFSNG P.R.A-K with specified letter, letters or range of letters.

DEFSTR letter list or range Define as string all defstr a.b.c variables beginning defstr s.x-z with
specified let- defstr m ter, letters or range of letters.

(Assignment and Allocation)

CLEAR n Set aside specified clear 750 number of bytes clear mem/io n for string storage, clear o DIM
arrayf dim ml dimxk) Allocate storage forDIM a(z,3) & -dimensional arraydim ai 5). A2(i5)( i

vith the dim b;x-2].c(j.k) size per dimension: DIM T(3 dim*l dim* '.. . . .,

etc. DIM may be followed by j list of arrays separated by commas.

A/8

Statement Function Examples

LET variable=expression Assign value of LET AS-"CH ARLIE" expression to Lt£T B1=C1 variable.
LET is LET A%-l# optional in LEVEL II BASIC.

(Sequence of Execution)

END End execution, 99 end return to Command Mode.

Stop execution, too stop print Break message with current line number. User may continue with
CONT. GOTO line-number Branch to specified goto too line-number.

GOSUB line-number Branch to sub- gosub 3000 routine beginning at hue-number.

Branch to statement return following last— executed GOSUB.




                                    Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 68
ON exp GOTO line*! ft'ne** Evaluate expres- ON K*l GOTO TOO. 200. 300 sion, if INTlexpl equals
one of the numbers I through k. branch to the appropriate line number. Otherwise go to next state-
ment

ON exp GOSUB Iine*I.. ..line*k Same as ON ... on j GOSU3 330.7000 GOTO except branch is to sub-
routine beginning at line*! , !inr*2, . .ottinemk, .

depending on

A/')

increment .">: one is used. &icC:U|Mcr4.

'SEW variable Close FOR-NEXT next loop. l'jr:s''-L- ;:uv NEXT I

re omitted I'o NEXT I.J.K close nested loops, a vjriaHe lUl ;iuy be used. See Chapter 4.

ERROR (code) Simulate the error ERROR (U) specified b\ code (see Error Coje Table).

ON ERROR GOTO line-number If an error occurs in on error goto 999 subsequent program lines,
branch to error routine begin- ning Jt line-number.

RESUME n Return from error RESUME routine to hue RESUME specified by n. [f n RESUME 100 is
zero or not sped- RESUME next lied, return to state- ment coui.ruir:'' Ifm- error. "NhXT". return to
statement following error-statement.

RANDOM Reseeds random random

R I'M ark indicator; REM a is altitude

A/;o

(Tests — Conditional Statements)

IF exp-1 THEN iijtimeni-} ELSE smmncnt-2 Tests >'Xp--I: IF A =THEN PRINT "ZERO" it rr-.ic.
I'XCC'jte ELSE PRINT ''NOT zero- srjtcmenl I then jump to next pro- ar.i:n line I unless SljtCTTlCnt !
WJS Li

GOTO).

Iff*/?-/ is False. jump directly to ELSE statement and execute sub- sequent statements.

(Graphics Statements)

CLS Clear Video cls Display.

RESET(.v.y) Turn off the graph- reset[B + b.m) ics block with hori- zontal coordinate x ar.J verticil
coordi- nate v. 0<=X <i:s a-.d 6<«Y<4« SET (jr.yl Turn on the srapli- set(a*2,b*c) icsMock specified by
coordinates r and >'. Same argu- ment limits as RESET.

(Special Statements)

POKE location. value Load value into poke 15635. 3d memory location poke i7770.a*-n Iboth
arguments in decimal form) 0<= .j/i«< = :5?.

OUT ptirt.vtilue Send u/nc to por; out 255, 10 (both argument* out 55. a between I) and :>5

A/ II


                                  Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 69
String Functions

Function Operation Examples

ASC(string) Returns ASCII code ot" fust character asc(bs) in string argument. ASC("H")

CHRS(u»fe exp) Returns a one-character string defined chrj(34) by code. If code specifies a control
CHR»(|) function, that function is activated.

FRE(smng) Returns amount of memory available FRE(AS) for string storage Argument is a dummy
variable.

INKEYS Strobes Keyboard and returns a one- INKEYS character string corresponding to key pressed
during strobe (null string if no key is pressed).

LES{itring) Returns length of string (zero for null LEN(a$*bs) String). LEN("HOURS")

LEFTS(string.n) Returns first n characters of string. LEFTS(AS.i) LEFTS(L1S+CS.8) LEFTS(AS,M +
L)

MlDS(string,p,n.) Returns substring of string with length MlDS(MS.5,2) n and starting at position p in
string, mids[ms+bs,p,l— 1

R IGHTS(s tring.n) Returns last n characters of string. rightS(nas,7) R1GHTS(AB$,M2)

STRS(mmteric exp) STRS( 1.2345) Returns a string representation of the STRS|A+B*2) evaluated
argument.

STRINGS(fl,c7i«/-) Returns a sequence strings(30. of n char symbols STRINGS(25. "A") using first
character STRING$(5,CS) of char.

VAUstring) Returns a numeric value corresponding val( *as+". ,, +C») , T ,

to a numeric-valued siring. val|as+b5) VALIG1SI

*string may be a string variable, expression, or constant.

Bggjn 3 -.I I... J W ;-, .

^ . . ... — -- . ,t - ^ jjp^un . _ wJ . i . M 'ff»T"* » '

,

A/12

Arithmetic Functions*

Function Opera lion (unless noted otherwise. Examples -l."E*JlS<=>t'.VJ<*l.7E+JS)

ABSff.rp) Returns absoluti ABS(L*.7] ABS(SINfX))

ATN(p.vpl Returns arctangent in radians. ATN(2.7) ATN{A*3)

CDBU.-.TP) Returns double-precision representa- CDBL(A) tion 01" exp. CDBL|AM/3»)

CINT(erp) Returns largest integer not greater C[NT(A = *B) than exp. Limits: -3:7fiS<=r.v/i<+J2"'tj8.

COS(exp) Returns the cosine of exp; assumes COS(2*A) exp is in radians. COSlA/57. 29578)




                                         Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 70
CSHGlexp) Returns single-precision representation, CSNG(A = )

with 5 4 rounding in least significant CSNG|.33-B») decimal when exp is double-precision.

EXPttxp) Returns the natural exponential, EXP(34.5) t t-xp ,{[x?i :.xp). EXPlA*a'C-1 )

FIXff.v/i) Returns the integer equivalent to truncated exp (fractional part of exp is chopped off).

INT(f.vp) Returns largest integer not greater

LOG(c-Tp) Re'.urns natural logarithm (base e) LOG(1 2.33) oi exp. Limits: exp must be positive.
LOG|A| B + B)

RNDIO) Returns a pseudo-random number between 0.000001 and 0.«')'M9 l) inclusive.

RSDtexp) Return* a pseudo-random number RiMD[40) between 1 .ind INTuwpl inclusive. RND|A'B)
Limits: 1 < =..'v/;< *27bS.

SGri(exp) Returns -I for negative exp: for SGN(A*B'3) riTOi'vii; !-l lor positive exp. SGN(COS(X)l
ienc-v:ili: \l \pr>.i.»i or constant.

A/ 13

SlN(«p) Retui. ,s i':e sine ol'j.vp; jiiun ""* is in ii.li.iriv 5IN|30/57. 23578)

SQR(exp) Retu ,:s !;..ire rout ofsvp. Li mils: SQRiA'A -a-a) «pij;.,,; '-; r.oa-p.j-jji:*e.

TAN(exp) Retui:ii :'.:: tangent of «Mrp; jytunus TANIX) TAN(XV017J533)

Special Functions

Function Operation and Limits Examples

ERL Returns 1m: number of curren t error. ERL

ERR Returns a Mine related to curt ent error ERR/2+1 code (if error has occurred). = ERR (error
code-l)*2. Also: t,ERR/2)+l = error code. INP(porf) Inputs and returns the current value inp(55) from
the specified port. Both argument and result ire in the range to 255 inclusive.

MEM Returns Total unused and unprotected MEM bytes in memory.

?BEK(tocation) Returns value stored in [lie specified peek( 15370) memory byte. location must be a
valid memory -idress in decimal form dee Memory Map in Appendix D).

POINT (x.y) Checks the graphics block specified by horizontal coordinate .v and vertical coordinate v,
It" block is '"on", returns a True I. if block is "utT". returns a ( i

False 1 (J 1 Limits: 0<=x <l ls.Q< =y <.4A.

Returns j .-.umber mdi.atme the cur- pos(O) rent cur^T position, n.e jr^urr.cnt "0" is a J.miny variable.

USR(rt) Brandies to machine lanyuaye -.Lib- USR(O) routine. For LEVEL II BASIC, n must equal 0.
Sec Chapter 3.

Returns '.': address 'Ahere the specified varptr'a$! variables r.ame, value, and po.nter are
VAHPTHlNl) stored. ..ir must be a valid variable n.ime. Returns if var has not been aliened a

value. MnEZLCZS A/14



                                      Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 71
"Blr.'."Jlj.''.'.

LEVEL II Reserved Words*

® FIX OUT ABS FOR PEEK AND FRE POINT ASC GET POKE ATN GOSUB POS CDBL GOTO
PRINT CHRS IF PUT CINT INKEYS RANDOM CLEAR INP READ CLOSE INPUT REM CLS 1NSTR
RESET CMD INT RESTORE CONT KILL RESUME COS LEFTS RETURN CSNG LET RIGHTS CVD
LSET RND CVI LEN SAVE CVS LINE SET DATA LIST SGN DEFDBL LOAD SIN DEFFN LOC SQR
DEF1NT LOF STEP DEFSNG LOG STOP DEFUSR MEM STRINGS DEFSTR MERGE STRJ
DELETE MIDS TAB DIM MKDS TAN EDIT MKIS THEN ELSE MKSS TIMES END NAME TROFF
ERL NEW TRON ERR NEXT USING ERROR NOT USR EXP ON VAL FIELD OPEN VARPTR

* Many of these words have no function in LEVEL II BASIC; they are reserved for use in LEVEL II
DISK BASIC. None of these words can be used inside a variable name.

zasss, EB A/15

Program Limits and Memory Overhead Ranges

Integers -327d8 to +32767 inclusive Single Precision - .70 4 E+38 to + 70 4 E+38 inclusive 1 1 1 1 1 .
111

Double Precision - 1.70141 1S34544556E+38 to +1.70141 S34544556E+38 inclusive I

String Range: L'p to 255 characters

Line Numbers Allowed: to 65529 inclusive

Program Line Length: Up to 255 characters

Memory Overhead

Program lines require 5 bytes minimum, as follows: Line Number - 2 bytes Line Pointer - 2 bytes
Carriage Return - 1 byte

In addition, each reserved word, operator, variable name, spdcial character and constant character
requires one byte.

Dynamic (RUN-time) Memory Allocation

Integer variables: 5 bytes each (2 for value, 3 for variable name)

Single-precision variables: 7 bytes each (4 for value, 3 for variable name)

Double-precision variables: 1 1 bytes each (8 for value, 3 for variable name)

String variables: 6 bytes minimum (3 for variable name, 3 for stack and variable pointers, 1 for each
character)

Array variables: bytes minimum 1 2 (3 for variable name, 2 for size, 1 for number of dimensions, 2 for
each dimension, and 2, 3, 4 or 8 [depending on array type] for each element in the array)

Each active FOR-NEXT loop requires 16 bytes.

Each active (non-returned) GOSUB requires 6 bytes.

Each level of parentheses requires 4 bytes plus 1 2 bytes for each temporary value.



                                  Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 72
*" A/16

B/LEYEL II Error Codes ABBREVIATION ERROR NF NEXT without FOR SN* Syntax error

RG Return without GOSL'B

OD Out of data

FC Illegal function call

OV Overflow

OM Out of memory

UL Undefined line

9 BS Subscript out of range

10 DD Redimensioned array

1 1 ,0 Division by «ro

12 ID Illegal direct

13 TM Type mismatch

14 OS Out of strips space

15 LS String too long

lb ST String formula too complex

17 CN Can't continue

18 NR NO RESUME 19 RW RFSl 'ME without error

20 UE Unprintable error

21 MO Missing operand

22 FD Bad file ..lata

23 Lj Di.s hamch'-is"

b/i

' ara -',:,

Explanation of Error Messages

NF NEXT without FOR: NEXT is used without a matching FOR statement. This error may also occur
if NEXT variable statements are reversed in a nested loop.

SN Syntax Error: This usually is the result of incorrect punctuation, open parenthesis, an illegal
character of a mis-spelled command.

RG RETURN without GOSUB: A RETURN statement was encountered before a matching GOSUB
was executed. OD Out of Data. A READ or INPUT # statement was executed with insufficient data
available. DATA statement may have been left out or all data may have been read from tape or
DATA.



                                   Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 73
FC An attempt was made to execute an operation using an illegal Illegal Function Call: parameter.
Examples: square root of a negative argument, negative matrix dimension, negative or zero LOG
arguments, etc. Or USR call without first POKEing the entry point OV Overflow: A value input or
derived is too large or small for the computer to handle. OM Out of Memory: All available memory has
been used or reserved. This may occur with very targe matrix dimensions, nested branches such as
GOTO, GOSUB, and FOR-NEXT Loops.

UL Undefined Line: An attempt was made to refer or branch to a non-existent line.

BS Subscript out of Range: An attempt was made to assign a matrix element with a subscript beyond
the DIMensioned range.

DD Redimensioned Array: An attempt was made to DiMension a matrix which had previously been
dimensioned by DIM or by default statements. It is a good idea to put all dimension statements at the
beginning of a program.

/Q Division by Zero: An attempt was made to use a value of zero In the denominator.

ID Illegal Direct: The use. of INPUT as a direct command.

TM Type Mismatch: An attempt was made to assign a non-string variable to a string or vice-versa.

OS Out of String Space: The amount of string space allocated was exceeded.

LS String Too Long: A string variable was assigned a string value which exceeded 255 characters in
length.

ST String Formula Too Complex: A string operation was too complex to handle. Break up the
operation into shorter steps.

B/2

an a ->- mag

CN Can't Continue: A CONT was issued at a point where no continuable program exists, e.g., after
program was ENDed or EDITed.

NR No RESUME: End of program reached in error-trapping mode.

RW RESUME without ERROR: A RESUME was encountered before ON ERROR GOTO was
executed. UE Unprintable Error: An attempt was made to generate an error using an ERROR
statement with an invalid code.

MO Missing Operand: An operation was attempted without providing one of the required operands.

FD Bad File Data: Data input from an externa! source (i.e., tape) was not correct or was in improper
sequence, etc.

L3 DISK BASIC only: An attempt was made to use a statement, function or command which is
available only when the TRS-80 Mini Disk is connected via the Expansion Interface.

nn




                                 Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 74
Appendix C: Control, ASCII and Graphics
Codes

: 1-31 Codt Function

0-7 None

8 Backspaces and erases current character

9 None

10-13 Carriage returns

14 Turns on cursor

15 Turns off cursor

it:: None

23 Converts to 32 character mode

24 Backspace -*Cursor

25 Advance *- Cursor

26 Downward t linefeed

27 Upward 4 linefeed

2S Hgne. return cursor to airplay pusitioniO.O)

29 Move cursor to beeinning o! !:ne

30 Erases to the end of live lint

31 Clear to the end of the frau

ri\

ASCII Character Codes 32-128 Code Giaracter

32 76 L 33 77 M 34 7H 'I

35 79 a 36 Ml p 37 31 .-

38 s: R 39 83 S 40 :-,l T 41 «s U 42 86 V 43 87 IV

44 K'i>. X 45 VI Y 46 90 Z 47 i '1! V or [ 48 92 t

49 1 '} -*

50 2 94 •" 51 3 95 - 52 4 96-127 lower case ft 53 5 codes 6+95 54 6 128 Space 55 7 36 57 58
Graphics Codes 129-191 59 f.O :<• You can examine these codes using; 61 62 > TO FOR X - 129
TO 19! 63 20 PRINT X;:PR1NT CHHSIX), 64 58 30 NEXT 65 A 66 B Space Compression Codes: 67
C 68 D 192 TO 255 69 1; Code Function 70 F 71 C 192-255 Tabs for TO 63 72 II spaces, respectively




                                    Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 75
73 I

74 J

en




       Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 76
Appendix D: Level II TRS-80 Memory Map

D/LEVEL II TRS-30 MEMORY MAP ADDRESS

HEXIDEC1MAL

LEVEL II BASIC ROM

RESERVED

14302 37DE COMMUNICATION STATL'S ADDRESS 14303 37DF COMMUNICATION DATA
ADDRESS 14304 37 EO INTERRUPT LATCH ADDRESS 14305 37E1 DISK DRIVE SELECT
LATCH ADDRESS 14308 37E4 CASSETTE SELECT LATCH ADDRESS 14312 37E8 LINE
PRINTER ADDRESS 14316 37 EC FLOPPY DISK CONTROLLER ADDRESS

TRS-30 KEYBOARD

TRS-^OCRT

VIDEO MEMORY 16383 3FFF 16384 4000 | LEVEL II BASIC FIXED RAM |

16402 4012 [ VECTORS IRST'S 1 THROUGH ") 16405 4015 KEYBOARD DEVICE CONTROL
BLOCK

DCB 0- DC B TYPE 1 = DRIVER ADDRESS

3 * 2 = DRIVER ADDRESS =

• 5=0 + 6 = 'K' + 7«T VIDEO DISPLAY CONTROL BLOCK DCB * 0- DCB TYPE r + - DRIVER
ADDRESS (LSB.1 I

+ 2 = DRIVER ADDRESS (MSB) t 3 « CURSOR IMS N ll.SIll 4 -CURSOR POSNiMSIi) «" 5
-CURSOR CHARACTER + 6^'D 1

7-

LINE PRINTER CONTROL BLOCK DCB 0- DCB TYPE * - DRIVER ADDRESS (I SB) !

* 2 -DRIVER ADDRESS (MSB) .INI S PAM .INI COl'M

16429 4o:d

M-16.3 404F 16464 4050 F DC INTERRUPT VECTOR 16466. 405: COMMUNICATIONS
INTERRUPT VECTOR I646S 4054 -16476 - 405C 16478 405E — 25 MSEC HEARTBEAT
INTERRLTT [" RESERVED

LEVEL II BASIC R.UI

16S70 4IE6

17127 42E7 ALWAYS ZERO

I PROGRAM TEXT

* SIMPLEVAR1ABLES



                            Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 77
I ARRAYS

FREE MEMORY

t STACK

t STRING SPACE

SPACE RESERVED FOR MACHINE LANGUAGE ROUTINES TO BE ACCESSED FROM BASIC -
IF MEMORY SIZE SET

20479 (4K) 4FFF(4K) 32767 (16K) 7FFF(16K) END OF ACTUAL MEMORY

D/2




                           Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 78
Appendix F: Derived Functions

Function Expressed in Terms of Level II Basic Functions

SECANT SEC(X)- 1/COSIX) COSECANT CSC(X)- 1/SIN(X) COTANGENT COTfX)= I.'TAN(X)
INVERSE SINE ARCSIN(X) - ATN(X/SQR(-X*X+1)) INVERSE COSINE ARCCOS<X) =
-ATN(X,'SQR(-X*X+1»+1.570S INVERSE SECANT ARCSEC(X) - ATNISORI X'X-I ))+( SGN(X)-1 )•
.57081

INVERSE COSECANT ARCCSQ X) = ATN( /SQRI X«X-1 ))+(SCN(X)-l)* .5708 1 1

INVERSE COTANGENT ARCCOT(X)= -ATN(X)+1.5708 HYPERBOLIC SINE SINH(X) =
(EXP(X)-EXP(-X)V2 HYPOBOLIC COSINE COSH(X) = (EXP(X>^EXP(-Xl)/2 HYPERBOLIC
TANGENT TANTK X) - - EXP(-X)/( EXP( X)+EXP(- X)* 2+ HYPERBOLIC SECANT SECHi X) = 2,'l
EXP(X)+EXP(-X)> HYPERBOLIC COSECANT CSCH(X) - 2/lEXP(X)-EXP(-X» HYPERBOLIC
COTANGENT COTHIX) - EXP(-X)/(EXP(X)-EXP(-X))*2-t 1

INVERSE HYPERBOLIC SINE ARGSINH(X) = LOG(X+SQR(X*X+D) INVERSE HYPERBOLIC
COSINE ARCCOSH(X)= L0G(X+S0R(X - X-1I) INVERSE HYPERBOLIC TANGENT ARGTANH(X)=
LOG((l+X)/< 1-X)V2 INVERSE HYPERBOLIC SECANT ARGSECH(X)- L0G((SQR(-X*X+l)+!)/X)
INVERSE HYPERBOLIC COSECANT ARGCSCH(X)^ LOG((SGN(X)-SQR(X'X+n+l),'X) INVERSE
HYPERBOLIC COTANGENT ARGCOTH(X)- LOC«X+l)/(X-I)V2

F/l




                                Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 79
Appendix H: User Programs

Space-Ship Lander

This challenging pr;" " .:v. ':: ymi qrnuijte hnJirtg 'Jequence on any ,1

of four planetary r. :.'.:<: I-'j-th. \U" en. Mjrs, j::J the ..steroid Ve-.ta. Before each Q-scen-j ".^irr,"
interval, yovi are given the following !

information: liler-ed Ti:r; l-e.or.ds'l Altitude (:::.w,;| :«l 1

Velocity (::: >:re'-.T;'hour - relative amount indicates motion as i\ from planetary body) :l j-.-il !.,!.. :r
ams>

Using this inform..!.' : a "bum e lo^rjns of fuel/ sccondi For :x ; n: : v,-j 1::0 Ke ;!..;rir.¥ the !0-s-.'sooJ
-!.„-. 't'oVbiSl'in ; irval. Bui ; be in the range 0-100 Ks/kc (over : the "C " fjree to become too 'ircst.

Hinls - V negative velc -. : : • you burn ed too r :.;i fuel '"J are t

moving away (• ' " l lry body - Fuel burns mi) "i i 15.5 K4 «c) - As you :onj-r fofo

H^jl -

- Landing cond;t ich plar

- Tlie up irro* 1 '•.'..'. Remember Co . ..-,V:

Good lu-k, C.':r.:":.i"

11C M :-|T> M. "

20? PRINT* 0, "ELAPSED ALTITUDE VELOCITY REGAINING IISPUT FUEL". 206 PRINT* 64.
"TIME <KH) <.'KN/HR> FUEL BURN:<kG/S£C 210 PRINT* 128+0 Tl; TftB<10> N2; TflB<24> 62,
TA6..2S> 114, TABC32) , INPUT F . ;

23* IF F=B GOTO 239 260 IF FO OR F>100 GOTO 220 270 T - N4/F IF T<19 THEN B4-T :

280 m - N4 - <F*B4> 283 V1-B3 286 Tl-Tl+84 230 85 » <G2+ (<G2 * N3V<A3 * -2>>> - <<F * G3)/(A3
+ M4» 293 B3 - B2 + <B3 * B4i 29a N3-N3 300 N3 » N3+ <<<B3 + B2> / Al> * B4> 303 B2*B3 307 IF
N3<8 GOTO 450 310 IF N4 <= GOTO 400 GOTO 210;

312 G-G+64 : IF Q * 128 > 960 THEN Q-832 315 GOTO .203- 320 PRINT " --» ILLEGAL FUEL
BURN - DUmVt— TRY AGAIN <0 TO 160>" GOTO 210 :

400 V2 SQR <B2£2 + N3 + G2 * 3630> PRINT "OUT OF FUEL AT"; Tl ;" SECONDS" :

410 V3 - M£<V2> + 10006 / 3660 420 Tl - Tl LOG <<V3 * N3 * lOOOO) / Gl> 420 GOTO 1000 430 72
- SOR <A6S <N3 / <26 * B5>>> + (26 * B3> + VI GOTO 1O00 :

460 T1-T1-(10-B4) 300 Gl - 980. 7 A3 = 6371 : fi*-"£ARTH" : G0T0143 ;

600 Gl 162 A3 » 1733 : A*-"HOON" : GOTO 143 :

700 Gl - 374 A3 - 3280 ; A*-"MARS" : GOTO 143 :




                                       Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 80
800 Gl - 17 5 A5 - 195 A*-" VESTA' GOTO 145 :
    1000 PRINT PRINT "VOU HAVE ".
    :
    1010 IF V2<29 PRINT "LAMBED" GOTO 1100
    1020 IF V2<lu0 PRINT "CRASHED - GOTO 1140 :
    1030 IF V2C239 PRINT "BEEN OBLITURATED" GOTO 5000 :
    1040 IF V2<3000 PRINT "MACE A NEW CRATER" GOTO 5000 .
    1030 IF V2>4999 PRINT "BORED B HOLE INTO THE PLANET" GOTO 5000 .
    1100 IF V2<1 PRINT "NICE TOUCH— VERV GOOD" GOTO 5000 :
    1110 IF V2<3 PRINT "NOT TOO BAO" GOTO 3000
    1120 PRINT "KIND OF ROUGH" GOTO 30Q0
    1140 IF V2C29 PRINT "YOU WILL HOT BE ABLE TO TAKE OFF" GOTO 5009 :
    1150 IF V2<43 PRINT "VOU ARE INJURED, THE LANDER IS ON FIRE" GOTO 5300 :
    1160 PRINT "THERE ARE NO SURVIVORS"
    3009 PRINT "VELOCITY AT IMPACT * * *" TABC40), R6S<V2) . "KM/HR"
    3010 PRINT "ELAPSED TIME ******"
    TABC40>; Tl "SECONDS" ,
    3920 END
Customer Information This program allows you (or your customers) to store information in a file for
future reference. It stores Name, Address and Phone Number; the file can be recalled, modified, etc.,
by specifying the desired action using the "Menu" (Table of Commands).

as H/2

This would be a handy way to create a mailing/phone list.

18 CLEftR 1888 :CLS :DIM N*<58> :DIH ASC39) :DIM P*<58> 28 CLS :PRINT8 19, "* * MENU * *"
:PRINT :PRIHT 36 PRINT "TO BUILD fl FILE TVPE 1 40 PRINT "TO SEE THE ENTIRE FILE TVPE 2
58 PRINT "TO SEE AN INDIVIDUAL NflME TVPE 3 68 PRINT "TO MAKE CORRECTIONS TVPE 4
78 PRINT "TO SAVE THE CURRENT FILE ON TAPE TVPE 5 08 PRINT "TO INPUT fl FILE FROM
TAPE TVPE 6 98 INPUT Q :0N GOTO 188.288,388,488.588,688 188 INPUT-WHEN READV, NIT
ENTER (TO CLOSE THE FILE TVPE 9999 FOR NAME>"*X 118 FOR 1-1 TO 58 :CLS
:PRINT"ENTER VOUR NAME <LflST FIRST, NO COMMAS PLEASE) 112 PRINT-THEN HIT THE
<ENTER' KEV" JINPUT N*<I> :
    115 IF N*CI>«"9999" THEN Pl-I :GOT015e
    128 INPUT-ENTER VOUR ADDRESS <N0 COMMAS)"; fl*<I>
    138 INPUT-ENTER VOUR PHONE • "; P*CI)
    135 IF FRE<X*> < 188 G0T0158
    148 NEXT
    158 PRINT-FILE CLOSED —
    " :INPUT"TO SEE THE MENU, HIT ENTER"! X
    168 Q0T028



                                 Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 81
      288 as :F0R 1-1 TO PI :PRINT N*<I>, A*<I>, P«I) :NEXT
      218 INPUT"TO SEE THE MENU, HIT ENTER"; X :QOT028
      388 CLS INPUT"EHT£R THE NflKE, LflST FIRST <N0 COMMAS)"* N$
      ;
      318 FOR 1-1 TO PI :IF H*<I)-f» THEN338
      315 NEXT
      328 PRINT-NAME NOT IN FILE" :G0T0348
      338 PRINT N*<I>, fl*<I>, P*<I)
      348 PRINT :PRINT-F0R flNOTHER NflME TVPE 1. OTHERWISE 8"j INPUT X :
      358 IF X-l G0T0389 ELSE20
      488 as :PRINT-ENTER THE NflME FOR THE LINE VOU HISH TO CHANGE (NO COMMRS)"
      485 INPUT N*
      418 FOR 1-1 TO PI IF N*-N*<I> GOT0438
      415 NEXT
      428 PRINT-NflME NOT IN FILE" :G0T0468
      433 PRINT-ENTER THE CORRECTED INFO. NflME, ADDRESS. PHONE"
      :
      448 INPUT N*<I>. A*<I>, P»<I)
      458 PRINT-THE LINE NOW READS :" :PRINT N*CI>. A*<I>, P*CI>
      468 INPUT-FOR ANOThER CORRECTION TVPE 1. OTHERWISE 8"; X
      479 IF X-l G0T0439
      488 GOT028
      588 CLS INPUT "MAKE PREPARATIONS FOR CASSETTE, WHEN REBDV HIT ENTER"* X
      :
" 318 PRINT-COPVING. . .
      528 PRINT #-1, PI
      338 FOR I»l TO PI PRINT #-1, N$<I). A*<I>, P*<I> :NEXT
      548 PR INT "COMPLETE —
      NOTE Tfl^ LOCATION"
      558 INPUT-TO SEE THE MENU, HIT ENTER"; X :G0T028
      600 as :INPUT UHEN READV, HIT ENTER"; X
      H
      618 PRINT" INPUT IMS . .
      628 INPUT 8-4, PI
      638 FOR I«l TO PI :INPUT #-1, N*<I), A*<I), P*<I> :NEXT
      640 PRINT'COMPLETE": INPUT-TO SEE MENU, HIT ENTER") X :G0T028
:!'.l'!"-V,.'.l . SS - !'"! J" ---I* 1

H/3



                                         Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 82
Triangle Computation '>i!n (jr:^)!iics

"TKis pfo^mii ili^i^.r. ;..; t!v .:;.- :r~;;;! ;":.::_::.-:>'.:> >x ;\\ is :'

graphics. It\j :r-; vay to:--.»^;:;jt.- :;.- .:—::;. ;:;.: .::' — :^ (iniyht I-e i;o>>J i\>r i",i ji-.-M.ii col :. L.icr.ti). i
'«.•;;: ,.p jrr.v.v | = [

in this printout. I

te CIS leo p»:nt"this F=-:.".--'i ^l^.lhte? *--e "E-* :f a tfii'-nole

113 PR-INT "GIVEN, j ~-r:'ETE-S -M) :-.-L,S 7-E ^ir', -LE "0 SCA^E 123 PRINTPRINT"F"_F 3 i!:-i
T.FE SSS. FCv 2 S::ES f-.rO 1 Ar.GLE TVPE : SAS, 139 PRINT'FCR 1 SIDE AND 2 AIJr-LES TVPE
ASA 149 "(PUT At IF Af'SAS" GO':i.B:03 158 if s*--mSm- :-;:.. 5400 2>*3 'SSS 219 PRINT'ENTER 3
'SICES. (LONGEST SIDE FIRST;. 229 INPUT LI. L2. L2 225 IF L2TH OR L3:-L1 PRINT "• * -
LONGEST FISST PLEASE . . . - FP.INT ^ 239 S-ai*L2»L3>/2 235 IF S •> LI FRI.'.T " - * - NOT A
TRM-M]LE * * *" PRINT : GOTO 210 249 V3 - 2 * SGR< S - (S-L2) - <S-L1> * <S~L3>) / LI 2?0 ft -
V3/L2 :R - ATNC ft / SGRC-fl + A»l>) 266 X3 - CQS<fl) * L2 270 HP = ai * V3> /2 289 G0T&5C-9 3'?9
'SAS 319 PRINT'ENTER 2 SIDES FIND 1 ANGLE: AB, AC. THETft: (LARGEST SIDE FIRST) 329
INPUT LI. L2. T 325 T - <T * 3 14159) / loO 329 V3 - L2 • SIN(T) 249 X2 = COSCT) * L2 353 RR =
CL1 * V3) /2 368 GOT0508 400 'ASA 41$ PRINT-ENTEP 2 ANGLES AMD 1 SIDE THETA1.
THETA2, ft8: 420 INPUT Tl, 12. L2 425 Tl - <T1 * 3 1-1159) / 130 T2 - CT2 * 2. 14159) / lt'O :

430 Y3 = L2 * SI.'HTi) 440 Bl = CCS<T1) - L2 450 B2 - V3 / TANCT2) 460 LI * Bl > &2 X3 = El 470 ftR
« (L2 * V3> / 2
     525 IF F=6 GuTC^lO
     530 S1-V3 ,' y'i '-2-Y2 .
532 :f i'iT'-:» - --v. :i

533 :f inT' :•?.> * :.- l_i 534 if >:: :o TKEMi>? 535 if >:::l.i taenia 537 IF X:«L2 Tl-£M,'.J0 540 FOR
V=2a "0 LI • L> 55? fcp y.'-i t.j -; :f_t 560 FOR >:=:C TO LI it 599 PRINTS 64 + ir-T>.'V3

n/

mUMaax^M^.^i^Ki.ikiuiiiM.iasi.imanaiTMmMmmnmtnmmmmm
     688 PRINT8 <X3 * 28> / 2, "C <"i X3 * F I ", "; VS • F I I »
     618 PRINT* 832. '«i£A -"J H! I - SO. UNITS' I
     628 PRINTS 896. -THE VOLUME OF THE SOLID CREATED BV REVOLVING THE TRIHNOLE "I
     625 PRINT-BBOUT THE X (WIS <LINE RB> -"J VT; "CUBIC UNITS'i
     638 PRINT8 768. »" i INPUT "TO RUN fWfllN. TYPE 1"» B6
     : IF 961 THEN18 - :
     648 STOP 00TO18
     :
     788 IF LK188 THEN F-2 G0T0758 :
     718 IF LK158 THEN F<*3 G0T0758 :
     728 IF LK288 THEN FM O0TO758 :
     738 IF Ll<258 THEN F-5 0OT0758 :



                                           Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 83
    748 PRINT "SORRY, SCflLE TOO LflROE TO 8E DRBUN" I F-6 G0T0318 : :
758 Ll-UVF Vl-Vl/F : Y2-Y2/F Y3-V3/F Xl-Xl/F ; X2-X2/F: X3-X3/F : : :

768 RETURN 1888 FOR Y-5 TO Y3*5 SETCXJ • 2 28 , V) : NEXT G0T0348 : :
    1188 FOR V-5 TO Y3*S SET<28 , Y> NEXT : 00T0548 : :
    1199 IF X3M27 S0SUB788
    1288 FOR X-Li TO X3 SET<X • 2 « 28 . Y3 + <S2 w <U-X> +5»
    : NEXT : Q0TO548 :
    1299 IF X3 < -18 O0SUB78B
    1388 FOR X-X3 TO 8 SET<X • 2 28 . Y3* <S1 • (»-X> +S»
    : NEXT 00T0548 : :
Targef'Practice

This program uses the INKEYS function to simulate one of the popular "video games". Notice how
few lines are required. This program could easily be "dressed up" - let the user choose a Fast Target,
Slow Target; keep score, print special messages, etc. To change the speed of the target, change line
40 as follows: - instead of "RNEK 10)/10", use "RND(0)*Sr For a slow-moving .

target, let SI be small (less than 1); for a faster target, let SI be greater than I S 1 should not exceed 1
.5 or the target will advance .

to the next line.
    1 CLS:PRINT PRINT CHRJC23) i "HIT '2- KEV TO BIN LEFT.
    2 PRINT "HIT
    :
V KEV TO flIH RIGHT. " 3 PRINT "HIT SPBCE Bflft TO FIRE. " 4 FOR I • 1 TO 5008 NEXT 18 CLS :
CB-928 1-1 PRINT 8 Cfl, "•" > : PRINT 8 fSi, ««•"! : :

28 F-8 38 IF I >- 15 PRINT 8 124, " "; 1-1 :
    48 PRINT 9 64 I • 4, • "; I-I+RMX18V18 : PRINTS 64+1*4, -
    :
    58 IF F-8 THEN 288
    68 RESET<MX, HV> MX-HX-HO MV-rTY-8
    : IF MX<-8 OR HX>»127 THEN28
    : :
    78 IF HV>2 SET<WX,HV> GOTO 38 :
    88 IF R8S< I*8-HX»4 THEN 28
    98 FOR J-l TO 6 PRINTS 64»4-I, "«*»•";
    : FOR K-l TO 58 NEXT : :
    95 PRINTS 64*4*1, " ": FOR K-l TO 58 NEXT K, J :
188 G0T018 288 VS-INKEV* 283 IF F-l STOP 218 IF V»0"Z" THEN 258

ts H/5



                                   Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 84
    220 IF Cft < 922 THEN 38
    228 PRINTS Cfl- ' Cft-Cfi-1-r- GOTO "280 V :
    259 IF V*OV THEN 288
    268 IF Cfl>934 THEN 29
    M
    279 PRINT* Cfi, "i Cfl*Cfl+l :
    289 PRINTS Cfl, "*", G0T039 :
    399 IF V*<>" THEN 33
    319 F-l MD-923-CF)
    : MV-46 MX-64-2+MD : : : SET<MX,HY> : G0T029
    311 END
Ready-Aim-Fire (Bouncing Dot Revisited)

Remember the LEVEL I Bouncing Dot program? This program takes that idea and turns it into a
game for one or more players by means of the INKEYS function. The object is to enter the correct
3-digit combination that will cause your missile to destroy the bouncing dot. (The 3-digit number
corresponds to the X-axis of the display and therefore should be in the range 001 to 1 26 - and be
sure to enter leading zeros for 1- or 2-digit numbers.)

The Computer always takes the first shot; then it's Player Number l*s turn.
    5 DIM Ni(4>
    6 CLS : INPUT "ENTER THE NO. OF PLflVERS"* XI PRINT "ENTER"; XI ; "1ST NflMES
    :" :
    7 FOR XI-1 TO XI INPUT N*<XI> NEXT XI-1
    : : :
19 as 29 FOR M-9 TO 127 SET<M.9> SET<M.4?> NEXT : : :
    39 FOR M-9 TO 47 SET<8,H> SET<127.M> : NEXT : :
    33 FOR X-l TO 121 STEP 19 RESET(X,9> NEXT : :
49 RANDOM V= RHD(49> +1 : X> RND(118> +4 :

59 D-l Q-l : Z=64 :
    69 RESET <Z,V-D> RESET <X- Q * 4, 24> :
    79 SET<Z,V> SET<X,24> GOSUB 599
    : :
99 V-V+D X-X+Q :
    99 IF X-123 OR X=4 THEN GOSUB 799
    198 IF V-47 THEN 129
    195 IF V-9 G0SU8 999
    118 IF V O
    -i Oft X <> -1 THEN 69
    129 V* V- 2 * D D- -0 GOTO 69 : :



                                 Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 85
     599 IF X-Z OR X»0+Z OR X-2 * 0*2 OR X-3 * 0+2 OR X«0 * 4+2 THEN IF V-24 G0SU8
     £99
     519 IF V-23 OR V-24 OR V25 THEN IF X-Z GOSUS 699
     529 RETURN
     699 X-l
     618 FOR Z-l TO 59 PRINTS 559, "HIT !•!"; NEXT : :
     628 FOR Z-l TO 25 PRINTS 558. i NEXT : :
639 X-X+i IF X<5 GOTO 619 :
     649 GOTO 2989
     789 X-X-2 * Q 0- -0 RETURN
     999 T* INKEV* fl# ""
     :
B* - "" C$ - ; :

: : " 1999 fit* INKEV* IF LEN<R*> - 9 THEN 1999 :
     1995 PRINT9 9, fl*t
—ngnmmnx z g szssssa szs samgESEga ea gz: H/6

SI 1010 B*= INKEV* IF LEN<B*>=0 THEN 1816 1015 PRINTI? 1, Bt: 1020 C*" IMKEV* IF
LEN<C*>-0 THEN 1020 1025 PRINTS 2, C*; 1030 RESETCZ. 1) : ) ft*+B*+C* : Z*VflL<X*> IF ZM.26
GOTO 1100 :

1033 PX-PX+1 1035 GOTO120 1040 RETURN 1100 FOR X-l TO 50 PRINTS 70, "TOO LARGE,
TRV flGRIN" 1110' PRINT* 70, " ": Z-l GOTO 1030 :

2000 if px-fl gosub 38ee " 2010 CLS : PRINT * * "i Nf<XI> i PRINT: PRINT 2617 PX(XI) - PX+PX<XI>
: PH<XI> PH<XI)+i 2829 PRINT, "SHOTS HITS PERCENTAGE" 2030 PRINT :PRINT "THIS ROUND
TflB<17> PX; TflB(20>"l";~Tfle<42> <1/PX> * 100 2035 IFPX<1)*9THEHPX(1>=1 2040 PRINT
:PRINT "TOTAL TRB<17> PX<XI>; 2042 PRINT TflB<28> PH<XI>) TflB<42> <PH<XI) / PX(XI)>
2045 FOR X-l TO 2500 : NEXT 2050 XI=XI+1 20S9 IF XI>X1 THEN XI=-1 2B65 PX*0 2070 GOTO10
2115 IF PX«e GOSUB 3008 3000 PSIMTB 0. "WHAT LUCK \\\" PX="i : RETURN :

=21 H/7

Things You Should Know — LEVEL II TRS-80 1. After executing an lNPUT*-tf (input from cassette),
some TRS-80'swill not READ properly from DATA statements. Instead a RESTORE will automatically
be performed before each READ, so that only first DATA item will be read. If your TRS-80 operates
this way (depends on a few IC's from one supplier), there is a simple fix. Insert the statement, POKE
16553,255 immediately after every INPUT #-a statement

2. A PRlNT#-ii statement can put no more than 248 bytes on the tape. If you have a lengthy PRINT*
list, only the first 248 bytes will be saved on tape; the rest will be lost Therefore you should break up
such lists into two or more PRINT* statements.

3. If you have an Expansion Interface connected and you need to Reset the Computer, hold down the
BREAK key and press Reset This will return you to the MEMORY SIZE question. Any BASIC




                                  Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 86
program in memory will be lost by this Reset sequence,

4. If you stop a BASIC program during execution, and then alter the program itself, all variables will be
reset to zero. You will not be able to continue execution where you left off. RUN it again. Note: If a
syntax error is encountered and BASIC puts you in the Edit mode, type Qto return to the Command
mode. You can then examine variable values, if you wish, before fixing the syntax error.

5. If you attempt to execute an LPR1NT or an LLIST when a line printer is not connected (or is turned
off), the computer will "freeze up". Either turn on the line printer, or, if one is not connected. Reset the
Computer (see 3 above).

6V AH the built-in mathematical functions in LEVEL I! BASIC return single-precision results (6-7 digits
of accuracy). Trig functions use or return radians, not degrees. A radian-degree conversion is given in
the LEVEL II Reference Manual.

7. Mjrd-to-finJ progrjni errors:

Shift characters arc nut always merchantable with their unshiflcd counterparts. For example, PRINT®
will not work if you u« a shifted (i. even though it Will look ok on the screen. If you can't find anything
wrong with a line which causes a syntax error message, try retyping the line, watching out for the shift
key.

Spaces arc sometimes important in LEVEL II BASIC. The following line is incorrect: IFD< OD-O
because OD is interpreted to mean "double-precision zero". Change it to: 1FD<0THEND=»0

8. To use the CLOAD? with cassette »2, use this format: CLOAD#-2,?"filename"

9. If you frequently get "double-entries" when pressing a particular key, remove the plastic key cap,
and carefully clean the contacts, using i stiff piece of paper. Insert the paper between the contacts,
press the key down to pinch the paper, and pull the paper out while the contacts are pinching it.

10. If you have other questions regarding operation of your TRS-80, call Customer Service, (817)
390-3583, or write: TRS-80 Customer Service Radio Shack P.O.Box 185 Fort Worth, TX 76102

11. The maximum TAB for an LPR1NT statement in 63. The Line Printer won't tab past column 63.
There's a simple way around this limitation, using the STRINGS function to simulate tabs past column
63.

Example: LPRINT TAB(5)'-NAME"TAB(30)"AODRESS-'STRING$(63.32]"BALANCE" "NAME" at
column 5, "ADDRESS" at column 30, will print and "BALANCE" at column 100.




                                   Level II BASIC Reference Manual — Page 87
